+++
title = 'Narrative Framework'
date = 2020-07-23T10:24:58-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'chapters'
weight = 5
+++
New Mexico history is complicated. I often think that colonialism is sometimes like a fine dust that is left with us, it falls on everything, it enters our mouths, gets in our eyes and our lungs. Whereas Spanish colonialism must be understood within the dynamics and violence of settler colonialism, two salient points emerge, that the descendants of those first settlers also descend from indigenous people, in spite of the dominant narratives that obscure this reality. Following the U.S. occupation of New Mexico in 1847 and the annexation of the territory a year later, both Native American and Hispanic peoples would become conquered people, subsumed into a nation. 

For the Indo-Hispanos of New Mexico, there is a wealth of legacy from which to draw that includes great beauty and profound wisdom reflected in centuries of art, literature, agriculture, philosophy and architecture. The imperative before us requires a commitment to recover and transform the colonizing views of these histories, revisiting them, story-by-story, site-by-site and event-by-event. We all have the responsibility to create spaces for Santa Fe’s residents to begin to remember — to pull back the layers and to put ourselves back together again, whole. New Mexico identity is set within a national paradigm of race that persistently renders non-whites and non-blacks invisible.

There are several prevailing narrative strands that are part of the colonialist paradigm. In what follows are a select few of these story lines.

### Racial Purity

The story is that of racial purity, that individuals in these communities retained their pure Spanish or Native American bloodlines. This narrative was, however, not necessarily new to New Mexicans. Many original settlers of New Mexico entered the northernmost frontier or the Spanish empire, with the consciously cultured and raced ideology of limpieza de sangre, a concept adopted itself from the legal statutes of the purity of blood in Toledo in 1449 which did not only make the distinction between Christian and Christian convert on the basis of blood lineage, but indeed specified a hierarchy of good and bad blood. Yet, even in the remote frontiers, the ideal was of maintaining colonial dichotomies of ruler and ruled, “savaged” and saved, white and other and colonizer and colonized flowered. Even for those early colonists, however, the idealization of purity of blood was a fiction that had long since played itself out in the Spanish frontiers between Moors and Jews. Nonetheless, the colonizing nobility now had the opportunity to refashion themselves anew, with a boundary maintaining goal that divided the nobility from the landed and landless peasantry and even more so from the colonized “indios” themselves.  Thus, the legal and social categories by which these colonial binaries divisions were sought, was structured in a coded ideology of calidad, which was not simply based in race, but civic status, occupation, sex, and the legitimacy or illegitimacy of birth.

### First Families

The concept of ‘founding families’ is one that countless communities have adopted globally to commemorate the experience of individuals whose efforts led to the settlement of a site. Its draw seems to be based on asserting a sense of belonging, perhaps understandable in a nation where the lives and experiences of Hispanos and Latinos generally are marginalized and even rendered invisible. However, rather than responding to that alienation and erasure with a more critical understanding and complex narrative, a static framework of identity surfaces wherein the stories of población, or the peopling of this area, are forefronted. 

Finally, aside from the fact that this concept premises a framework that is exclusive and perhaps even elitist, the idea of ‘first families’ fails to account for the fact that the settlements of the New Mexico were constantly in flux and dynamic. First, the inevitable mestizaje that followed colonization resulted in generations of racial and cultural mixture realized and defined as much by amicable unions as by coercive relations. Also, settlements like Santa Cruz de la Cañada actually became a predominant point of origin in the 1700s for the movement northward from Mexico for many colonists creating community settlements. There are many manifestations to this concept. In Santa Fe it comes through the public display of the family crests.

### Selective Genealogies: A Purely Spanish Heritage Fantasy

I am always interested in people in New Mexico who say, “I am 10-20 + generations New Mexican.” I believe that the proclamation is essentially a counter to living in a society that renders Latinos as criminal and invisible and the story is about about recognizing a sense of place, a long connection to the land. Yet, it is also ironic that it operates to also create a narrow sense of identity in two ways. One, it positions an individuals in the colonial paradigm that traces ancestry along a single patriarchal line and historically has done so in order to trace a connection to Spain. Second, in tracing these single lines, it erases the complexity that actually comes with a family tree. Because a family is exponential and everyone descends from 2 parents, 4 grandparents, 8 great great-grandparents, ultimately, at the tenth generation, which more or less takes us to the late 1600s to mid 1700s in New Mexico, we descend from 512 individuals, at least at the biological level, equally. In spite of the fantasy of Spanish purity, history reveals that by 1750, the population of New Mexico was largely mixed, with over 70 percent of people having a parent or grandparent that was indigenous. So, when calculated to the tenth generation, of these 512 individuals, over 70 percent of them were indigenous people.

### Language

The mythology that has been propagated over the years posits that people from northern New Mexico continue in the 21st century to  speak a dialect of sixteenth century Spanish. Language is complex and the evolution of the Spanish language in New Mexico reflects a confluence as reflected in various important phases. From a historical standpoint, several key watershed moments are definitive even in the development of language. First, because of the resettlement of New Mexico in 1692, many of the settlers were born in the New World and spoke the Spanish of Mexico. Second, with the conquest of the region by the United States.

There were also early proponents of this myth, including Aurelio Macedonio Espinosa, professor of Romance languages at Stanford University from 1909 to 1947, who according to historian John Nieto Phillips, was “driven by the conviction that his forebears, the conquistadores that settled New Mexico and southern Colorado , had left a linguistic and racial legacy to the people, and that the villages of the region were their direct descendants.”[^1]

[^1]:  John M. Nieto-Philips, The Language of Blood: The Making of Spanish American Identity in New Mexico, 1880-1930s. University of New Mexico Press, 2004. 