+++
title = 'People'
date = 2020-09-18T15:20:05-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'capitulo'
weight = 1
+++
New Mexico identity is set within a national paradigm of race that persistently renders non-whites and non-blacks invisible. Thanks to the tourism industry, even locally, representations of New Mexico’s people are reduced to an early 20th century invention of three typologies — Anglo, Indian and Spanish — an enduring and yet flawed mythology that continues to conflate distinctions between sovereign tribes, erasing entire groups of people and obscuring the reality of centuries of mixture, born from acts of both love and violence, including that of indigenous slavery. Here, identity is unique and the language of blood and belonging that developed within Spanish colonial rule was a highly complex racial taxonomy and cultural hierarchy of caste that operated to control difference, with a vocabulary so ingrained that some permeations exist to this day, including words like mestizo and coyote. 

However, identity is neither static nor something that can be easily placed in a box. Here, it is more like nesting dolls, one inside the other, and beauty buried in the layers of complexity and consciousness, unknown perhaps, but still there. Some individuals and communities stand in strength and sovereignty. Others, whether they carry the complexity of their ancestry in their faces and hands or not, sustain memory in an aching consciousness. 

Yet, the most meaningful and profound reflections of New Mexico’s people emerge in both the individual and the collective and all of the relationships developed and sustained in-between. Here can be found sketches of a multitude of experiences, including of holy men and women who have long connected ground and sky, of farmers and ranchers whose relationships to land and animals nourishes community; of creatives, whose hands, hearts and minds elevate beauty and consciousness; and of leaders, formal and informal, particularly those who have had the courage to rise in their hunger for justice.

New Mexico history is complicated. I often think that colonialism is sometimes like a fine dust that is left with us, it falls on everything, it enters our mouths, gets in our eyes and our lungs. Whereas Spanish colonialism must be understood within the dynamics and violence of settler colonialism, two salient points emerge, that the descendants of those first settlers also descend from indigenous people, in spite of the dominant narratives that obscure this reality. Following the U.S. occupation of New Mexico in 1847 and the annexation of the territory a year later, both Native American and Hispanic peoples would become conquered people, subsumed into a nation. 

For the Indo-Hispanos of New Mexico, there is a wealth of legacy from which to draw that includes great beauty and profound wisdom reflected in centuries of art, literature, agriculture, philosophy and architecture. The imperative before us requires a commitment to recover and transform the colonizing views of these histories, revisiting them, story-by-story, site-by-site and event-by-event. We all have the responsibility to create spaces for Santa Fe’s residents to begin to remember — to pull back the layers and to put ourselves back together again, whole. New Mexico identity is set within a national paradigm of race that persistently renders non-whites and non-blacks invisible.

### The Myths

Just as language serves to define what it means to be human, symbols serve as predominant instruments through which the world comes to be represented. The word ‘symbol’ comes from the Greek σύμβολον symbolon, which means “token,” or “watchword" and is taken from the concept of bringing things together in order to contrast and compare toward determining if something is genuine. Symbols take the form of words, sounds, gestures, ideas or visual images and are used to convey other ideas and beliefs and are therefore foundational in terms of narratives and myths. 

Over the years, as I have worked particularly as a cultural anthropologist in New Mexico, observing and listening, I have noted a number of  discernible symbols that have come to be embedded in the physical landscape as well as in the consciousness of people. Toward a decolonial project, it is important to begin to identity these key symbols. The narrative of challenging symbols in New Mexico accentuates both figurative and literal representations and serves in many ways as a foundation for other sections of this overall context, including the narrative of identity and ritual celebrations. While a more comprehensive assessment of symbols may be necessary, what follows are some key symbols to consider more closely.

#### Conquistador

The Spanish word conquistador is translated to the English and means “conqueror.” The historical figure behind the word, is associated with males who were mercenaries of the Spanish or Portuguese Monarchies charged with the conquest of the Americas. Technically, conquistadores constitute all military officials and could very well be extended to include all first European settlers of a region. The use of the word in official documents and even in popular culture was most likely limited to a very particular era—the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

In New Mexico, the use of the term emerged in the twentieth century, particularly as a moniker of the overarching frame of Nuevomexicano identity in singular Spanish terms. In a letter from writer, artist and the first curator for the Spanish Colonial Arts, Museum of New Mexico, Elizabeth Boyd, to anthropologist Charles Briggs in 1973, she noted, “As I have told you before –they (northern N.M. Spanish) are great people but most of them have lost historical background behind grandparents—when it merges into myths on los conquistadores.”[^1] The figure of the conquistador, according to anthropologist Sylvia Rodriguez, “constitutes nothing less a claim to whiteness.” So ingrained in consciousness and narrative, many New Mexicans continue to frame their sense of identity in simple terms, as the “descendants of conquistadores.”[^2]

#### Tri-Cultural Iconography

Thanks to the tourism industry, even locally, representations of New Mexico’s people are reduced to an early 20th century invention of three typologies — Anglo, Indian and Spanish — an enduring and yet deeply flawed mythology. This framework that has served as a short hand for defining who the people of New Mexico are, could not be more erroneous or offensive in that 1) it erases entire communities, including African and African American presence that, however small existed in the colonial period and exist still and contemporary community; or Asians, including Japanese interned during the mid twentieth century; 2) It created a mold of a singular American Indian identity, as if being Apache and being Ute and being Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo is all the same. In reality, each hold distinct languages, histories and world views; 3) It failed to recognize the beauty and complexity of mixture and difference, where even the slavery of Indigenous peoples was foundational in the development of who contemporary communities actually are; 4) It usually depicts male images, thus enforcing the prevalence of patriarchy or at least the absence of female figures in these depictions; and 5) Core to this mythology is the notion of harmony. The manifestations of this typologies of identity are so pervasive that they have become a part of the vocabulary, narrative and consciousness, but they are also manifest still in tangible forms throughout the landscape, including as embedded in organizational and governmental seals and logos.

### Identity

#### Racial Purity

The story is that of racial purity, that individuals in these communities retained their pure Spanish or Native American bloodlines. This narrative was, however, not necessarily new to New Mexicans. Many original settlers of New Mexico entered the northernmost frontier or the Spanish empire, with the consciously cultured and raced ideology of limpieza de sangre, a concept adopted itself from the legal statutes of the purity of blood in Toledo in 1449 which did not only make the distinction between Christian and Christian convert on the basis of blood lineage, but indeed specified a hierarchy of good and bad blood. Yet, even in the remote frontiers, the ideal was of maintaining colonial dichotomies of ruler and ruled, “savaged” and saved, white and other and colonizer and colonized flowered. Even for those early colonists, however, the idealization of purity of blood was a fiction that had long since played itself out in the Spanish frontiers between Moors and Jews. Nonetheless, the colonizing nobility now had the opportunity to refashion themselves anew, with a boundary maintaining goal that divided the nobility from the landed and landless peasantry and even more so from the colonized “indios” themselves.  Thus, the legal and social categories by which these colonial binaries divisions were sought, was structured in a coded ideology of calidad, which was not simply based in race, but civic status, occupation, sex, and the legitimacy or illegitimacy of birth.

#### First Families

The concept of ‘founding families’ is one that countless communities have adopted globally to commemorate the experience of individuals whose efforts led to the settlement of a site. Its draw seems to be based on asserting a sense of belonging, perhaps understandable in a nation where the lives and experiences of Hispanos and Latinos generally are marginalized and even rendered invisible. However, rather than responding to that alienation and erasure with a more critical understanding and complex narrative, a static framework of identity surfaces wherein the stories of población, or the peopling of this area, are forefronted. 

Finally, aside from the fact that this concept premises a framework that is exclusive and perhaps even elitist, the idea of ‘first families’ fails to account for the fact that the settlements of the New Mexico were constantly in flux and dynamic. First, the inevitable mestizaje that followed colonization resulted in generations of racial and cultural mixture realized and defined as much by amicable unions as by coercive relations. Also, settlements like Santa Cruz de la Cañada actually became a predominant point of origin in the 1700s for the movement northward from Mexico for many colonists creating community settlements. There are many manifestations to this concept. In Santa Fe it comes through the public display of the family crests.

#### Selective Genealogies: A Purely Spanish Heritage Fantasy

I am always interested in people in New Mexico who say, “I am 10-20 + generations New Mexican.” I believe that the proclamation is essentially a counter to living in a society that renders Latinos as criminal and invisible and the story is about about recognizing a sense of place, a long connection to the land. Yet, it is also ironic that it operates to also create a narrow sense of identity in two ways. One, it positions an individuals in the colonial paradigm that traces ancestry along a single patriarchal line and historically has done so in order to trace a connection to Spain. Second, in tracing these single lines, it erases the complexity that actually comes with a family tree. Because a family is exponential and everyone descends from 2 parents, 4 grandparents, 8 great great-grandparents, ultimately, at the tenth generation, which more or less takes us to the late 1600s to mid 1700s in New Mexico, we descend from 512 individuals, at least at the biological level, equally. In spite of the fantasy of Spanish purity, history reveals that by 1750, the population of New Mexico was largely mixed, with over 70 percent of people having a parent or grandparent that was indigenous. So, when calculated to the tenth generation, of these 512 individuals, over 70 percent of them were indigenous people.

#### The Language We Speak

The mythology that has been propagated over the years posits that people from northern New Mexico continue in the 21st century to  speak a dialect of sixteenth century Spanish. Language is complex and the evolution of the Spanish language in New Mexico reflects a confluence as reflected in various important phases. From a historical standpoint, several key watershed moments are definitive even in the development of language. First, because of the resettlement of New Mexico in 1692, many of the settlers were born in the New World and spoke the Spanish of Mexico. Second, with the conquest of the region by the United States.

There were also early proponents of this myth, including Aurelio Macedonio Espinosa, professor of Romance languages at Stanford University from 1909 to 1947, who according to historian John Nieto Phillips, was “driven by the conviction that his forebears, the conquistadores that settled New Mexico and southern Colorado , had left a linguistic and racial legacy to the people, and that the villages of the region were their direct descendants.”[^3]

[^1]: See Correspondence, E. Boyd collection, Box, 1, Folder 8a.  SRCA, Santa Fe, NM.
[^2]: See Sylvia Rodriguez, “Tourism, Whiteness, and the Vanishing Anglo.” In Seeing and Being Seen: Tourism in the American West. David M. Wrobel and Patrick T. Long, eds. Pp. 194–210. Lawrence: Published for The Center of the American West, University of Colorado at Boulder by the University Press of Kansas, 2001, p. 205.
[^3]: John M. Nieto-Philips, The Language of Blood: The Making of Spanish American Identity in New Mexico, 1880-1930s. University of New Mexico Press, 2004. 
