+++
title = 'Story'
date = 2020-09-18T15:20:21-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'capitulo'
weight = 1
+++
New Mexico, there are as many stories as there have been and are people, places and events, but recognizing that the story depends upon its teller is essential. Here, multiple and overlapping themes evoke origins, prophesy, innovation and convergence. Some are tales spun to excite, enchant or lure and others to inform and elevate.
History, however, is not only something that is told and represented, but also something that is lived, something that gives the world shape, that both engenders a contemplation of the images of the past that can deepen awareness of the present. The present in New Mexico, however, unfortunately retains traumas born from the past, a spiritual, emotional and psychological wounding that radiates across the generations and has contemporary implications, including internalized wounds that are only beginning to be measured. 

Today, the communities of northern New Mexico are more susceptible to poverty, despair, homelessness, high rates of suicide, hunger and a devastating dependence on drugs and alcohol and as such are often at the bottom of many national indicators. This report makes the case that these present day realities are bound to something much deeper, a trauma that has evolved from the cumulative impact of transgenerational experiences of displacement and loss.[^1]

The cataclysmic violence born from Spanish colonialism caused the original wounds, resulting in genocide, slavery and devastating losses to Native American peoples. Racial mixture also resulted from this moment of encounter and centuries of convergence of cultures, leaving an aching consciousness in many of its heirs to this day, primarily those who would come to be called Hispanos. Harms were further exacerbated by U.S. imperialism, where conquest led to a loss of land, language and cultural traditions, as well as the obfuscation and erasure of truth from the historical narratives, a reality impacting both Native American and Indo-Hispano communities. While there have been points of reconciliation, the original racial fault lines have only widened over the ages, fueling tensions and shaping present day inequities.

While it is critical to trace the jagged edges of what New Mexico tells, it is also important to recognize that New Mexico’s collective identity is both born out of the past and nourished by it as well. There is a delicacy, but also strength in what we do to collectively change what we are. Recovery, healing and transcendence begin with a critical remembering, but also frame a creative reimagining of the present and future.

### Words that Wound

Language, including words and speech, is among the most important factor by which humans have been defined. Underlying language are the words that are used to define the world in which people live, their consciousness and means by which to understand relationships of every kind. It is also the foundation for communication and speech. What words are used to define the world forms the basis for how something is understood. It holds the potential to reveal the breadth of understanding or could narrow it. In this way, language is a powerful tool that can both create and sharpen divides as well as create openings for dialogue and understanding. 

In the colonial setting, where laws and policies governed and were recognized as the perfect instrument of empire, as some have suggested, it was made so perhaps because of what it could hide in language. For instance, when handed Antonio de Nebrija’s Spanish Gramática, the first-ever grammar of any modern European language, Queen Isabela supposedly asked the scholar, “What is it for?” “Language,” Nebrija reportedly stated, “is the perfect instrument of empire.” Nebrija’s astute observation accentuated not just the generative power of language, but perhaps its capacity, indeed the power of language to obscure, hide and deflect. In this way, legal discourse, especially Spanish legal discourse, as a product of language and empire would likewise become the ‘perfect instrument’ twisting realities with the twinned ideologies of logic and language. Legal scholar Robert A. Williams goes on to note that “law’s utility in generating legitimating arguments for the acquisition, maintenance, and defense of colonial spheres of influence was also seized on as a principle instrument of empire.” In this way, the use of language, including claiming and naming places, by agents of empire were part of this reality.[^2]

Although the power of language was an essential element of conquest and domination, it continues to be deployed in a contemporary society, particularly in a society that remains deeply defined by racist speech. As Critical Race Theory scholar Richard Delgado notes, 

> In addition to the harms of immediate emotional distress and infringement of dignity, racial insults inflict psychological harm upon the victim. Racial slurs may cause long-term emotional pain because they draw upon and intensify the effects of the stigmatization, labeling, and disrespectful treatment that the victim has previously undergone. Social scientists who have studied the effects of racism have found that speech that communicates low regard for an individual because of race ‘tends to create in the victim those very traits of ‘inferiority’ that it ascribes to him.[^3]

In the same article, Delgado notes that, “Most people today know that certain words are offensive and only calculated to wound.”[^4] Examples of these types of words or phrases are “spick” or “dirty Indian,” words that continue to reflect the supremacy of some groups or individuals over others. Another example prevalent in our era is the use of the word “illegal” to classify undocumented immigrants to the United States. In his support of the dignity of human rights and immigrants in the U.S., Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning Holocaust survivor and refugee has explicitly warned against the use of this word for people, noting, “No human being is illegal” reminding us that “once you label a people ‘illegal,’ that is exactly what the Nazis did to Jews.”[^5] In spite of dismissal of racial insults as somehow adhering to some sort of political correctness, words matter and can be deeply harmful, but Wiesel’s contention is that it could lead to more drastic and devastating consequences. Although a well known simple children’s rhyme implies that physical harm is greater than the emotional and psychological harm that comes from speech, new research in science has begun to reveal that the effect of verbal abuse is as consequential as physical abuse. 

There are also a class of words that continue to be used in places like New Mexico that are equally as harmful, even if, perhaps they are not necessarily “calculated to wound.” In New Mexico, the harms and hurt is sometimes conveyed simply in the words that we use to describe and to celebrate history. For instance, a part of the dissent of the Santa Fe Fiesta revolves around the vocabulary used — “celebration of reconquest,” which places the icon of the conquest and conqueror in a positive light, rather than more conscientiously or critically, at the very least complex. The protests around the Santa Fe Fiesta have addressed how harmful it is for Native American/Tribal peoples to hear this type of language, the language that makes explicit the loss that transpired in the conquest. Ironically, proponents of these celebrations across New Mexico, often respond with the idea that ‘what is past is past and should be left in the past,’ even as celebrations of the historical conquest are fore fronted.

Although the harm wrought by the vocabulary underlying the celebration of victorious conquest of Spanish colonialism upon Native American communities is patently clear, the reality is that colonialism harmed everyone. In this way, this language is also harmful to Indo-Hispanos, including children who begin to define their sense of self and others based on what is communicated. In this same way, language also fails wholly to capture the complexity of history and identity. Ethnic terms like “Spanish” and “Spanish American,” intentional verbal constructions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, are part and parcel of the vocabulary that obscured and erased more than it reflected the reality of centuries of ethnic mixtures resulting from indigenous, European and African cultural convergence in New Mexico history. 

In the creation of this binary of ‘Spanish conqueror’ and ‘Native American conquered,’ lost are the multiple cycles of conquest that are actually the reality of New Mexico history. The language of empire can also be found at the heart of U.S. imperialism. The contemporary reflections of how this language continues to frame a sense of history was revealed in December of 2016, when New Mexico Education Secretary-designate Christopher Ruszkowski, championing charter schools and school choice, argued that these schools and policies were “quintessentially American.” He punctuated his point by noting: “This is a country built over the last 250 years on things like freedom, choice, competition, options, going west, Manifest Destiny — these are the fundamental principles of this country.”[^6] Though accused of being insensitive, the statement made by New Mexico’s highest ranking educational official, reflected not only poor comparative analysis, but his own lack of understanding of history and its complexities. Referring to ‘Manifest Destiny” as a “fundamental principle” of the United States, alongside freedom, was absurd and inappropriate, more than a phrase, it was, nonetheless fundamental, as a policy that defines U.S. history, one that has not fully been assessed for its impact upon places like New Mexico. Assessing language requires interrogating history, which is challenging in a climate we are living in since it positioning the critique as “un-American.”

Interrogating the language of conquest and dominance, as well as the words that continue to reflect patriarchy, racism and homophobia is a necessary part of decolonial project. Thinking critically of the language that is used to define New Mexico, its events, places and its people is part of this imperative. Just as language can be used to divide, it is also the tool that holds the potential to preface the importance of different perspectives; it is the the means by which dialogue across the divides can happen; and it is the primary way to begin fore-fronting truth, toward transformation and its ultimate reconciliation. 

### Symbols

#### Zia Symbol - A Case Study in Appropriation

The most recognized of New Mexico symbols can be found on the official New Mexico State Flag, though it also appears on letterhead, license plate, tattoos and on various commercial products. Although a distinctively indigenous design, the credit is often given to Harry P. Mera, a Pennsylvania born physician and archeologist who responded to a design competition called for by the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1923. The design was taken by Mera from a 19th century pot that was on display in the Museum of Anthropology in Santa Fe, who worked with his spouse, Reba to create the flag. According the Office of the New Mexico Secretary of State, the flag’s colors, “red and yellow are the colors of Isabel of Castilla that the Spanish Conquistadors brought to the New World,” which reveal how the Meras were also part of the effort to define a romanticized idea that was prevalent at the time of the centrality of Spain in the iconography of New Mexico. In spite of the backdrop and colors, core to the design is the zia symbol itself, which Zia Pueblo has rightfully claimed for decades, in a battle against the State, was appropriated without the tribe’s permission and serves still as a contentious issue.[^7]

- Seal of the City of Española illustrates three key symbols, including the conquistador helmet, a moving locomotive and a depiction of a clay wedding vase, upon which is emblazoned the Zia symbol. This unique version of the Tri-Cultural mythology could use further analysis, but reveals how these objects stand in for entire histories of a people, static instead of the complexity that is this unique town.

- Seal of the City of Santa Fe holds several elements and as reflected in notes found in the graphic design, revealing how the three predominant layers of colonization function and how they get framed in singular motifs. Based on my correspondence with the Santa Fe City Clerk Yolanda Y. Vigil, who notes that notes contained in the design follow: “The official seal of the city of Santa Fe incorporates much of the city's history which spans nearly four centuries. The shield depicts the castle from Oñate, who established the Spanish government in 1598; the Lion of DeVargas, who gained from the Native Americans the return of Santa Fe to Spanish government in 1693; the Mexican Eagle, which symbolizes the city's change to Mexican rule as Mexico gained its independence in 1821; and the stars and stripes, which represent the establishment of the United States system of government in 1846.”[^8]

- Seal of Town of Taos has three key symbols. At the center of the seal is a snow capped mountain and a river running from it, revealing how critical the natural landscape is. The zia symbol is suspended above the mountain. Also incorporated is the year 1934, which corresponds to the year in which the town was incorporated.

A more in depth analysis of seals in New Mexico and their origin, including design motivation and ethic should be done. Even this cursory analysis, reveals, however, these symbols for governance begin to function in a municipal identity and what that means to both residents and visitors alike.

#### A University Seal and its Murals

At the national level, university seals and mascots alike have been the subject of both racist stereotype and motifs for more than a century, particularly of American Indians. The resistance to these portrayals has also existed for decades. The University of New Mexico (UNM) has provided an interesting case study for all of these issues. For instance, the official seal for the university, created by University President Edward Gray in 1910 drew from tri-cultural motif and in form is similar to the Española seal.[^9] Just as the Española seal uses an object to represent the Native American, the UNM seal includes a stylistic bird, while two human male figures, which complete the tripartite representation. These two latter figures are the armed figures of the Spanish conquistador and buckskin clad the American frontiersman. The vocal resistance to this seal was led in 2016 primarily by Native American student groups (e.g. Kiva Club and Red Nation). The work of Alicia Romero to analyze the symbolism, including her emphasis of these two human figures as “heroic figure of whiteness...”[^10] The seal was ultimately discontinued and continues an active process to replace it.

Resistance to public displays of colonialist iconography has existed for decades at the University of New Mexico, however. In 1938, University of New Mexico’s President, James Zimmerman commissioned Kenneth Adams to create the “Three Peoples” paintings to be exhibited on the walls of the University of New Mexico’s Zimmerman library for its opening. Adams was a Kansas born artist who had become a member of the Taos Society of Artists. The representation of Native American, Hispanos and Anglos in paintings draw from the most stereotypical motifs and serve as classic examples of how these cultures come to be raced, gendered and classed. Historian Chris Wilson has noted that the Adams paintings “constitute the foremost distillation of the visual iconography of triculturalism.” As resistance to these paintings has re-emerged, historian Samuel Sisneros has recently documented the two decades of student activism on campus that has surrounded these paintings, from 1970 to 1995.[^11]

#### La Conquistadora

While most of the symbolic icons of conquest would lean toward a gendered male figure, there is one exception. The small wooden statue of the Virgin Mary that sits in the Santa Fe Cathedral Basilica is one of the most iconic symbols in Santa Fe. For some it represents the manifestation of a sustained and profound connection to their Catholic faith as well as to their cultural heritage. As Ronald Grimes has argued, the saint emerges as a “symbolic mother” and “source of cultural identity” and “is the symbolic matrix of genealogical lines which lead to some of the most prominent families in Santa Fe and the Rio Grande valley.”[^12] While the devotion to this patron saint of Catholic Santa Fe is broader than old Santa Fe Hispanic communities, it is important to recognize what it means for multiple generations that go back hundred of years to hold this devotion. While it has been thought that the origin of this Marian image is of Spain, this claim has not been documented and may have in fact been part of the mythology to whiten the origins. However, it is known that Fray Alonso de Benavides first brought the wooden saint to Santa Fe in 1625, a community that at that time included one thousand residents.[^13] Although the saint would arrive in New Mexico in 1625, with the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 the figure would be carried with Spanish survivors to El Paso del Norte (present day El Paso, Texas) until its return in 1693.

They depth of this particular symbolism, however, is poignantly embedded in the name most popularized — La Conquistadora. In spite of the name known now, originally, Benavides himself referred to the saint as “Tránsito de la Virgen,” a name that Historian Fray Angelico Chavez would translate as “Assumption of the Virgin.”[^14] In that first century, the name of the saint was also referred to in the following ways: ‘Our Lady of the Assumption,’ then ‘The Immaculate Conception,” and eventually, ‘ Our Lady of the Rosary.’ Although many titles would be attributed to the saint through the centuries the most popular and resonant was that given by the governor of New Mexico seven decades after it first appears in New Mexico. Following the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 and Reconquest, Diego de Vargas renames the icon in 1693 as “Nuestra Señora de la Conquista,” or as she would come to be known more popularly, “La Conquistadora.” Even though he is credited with this new baptism, on his own deathbed, the name must not have yet been widely recognized, as Vargas calls for masses to be said in honor of “Our Lady of Remedies.”[^15]

On March 19, 1973, la Conquistadora was stolen, setting off a search that extended across multiple agencies, culminating a month later, when the figure was recovered. In 1992, because of significant protests, Archbishop Robert Sanchez added (not replaced as is often stated) a new name to La Conquistadora, “Our Lady of Peace” an effort as noted then to “heal all hurts of the past and bring all people together.”As experienced by Archbishop Sanchez twenty-five years ago, any effort to change the name of this figure is not easy. While many have expressed concern about the association of the Virgin in terms of military and the rhetoric of subjugation, including most recently by Archbishop John Wester, devotees like Fray Angélico Chávez argued that the name was given because she came with the first conquistadores, not because of any conquests, bloody or unbloody.”[^16] This logic simply does not hold. The name is set in the reality and symbol of violence and subjugation. This figure is over 400 years old and has held many titles and this last one does not fit what is core to the devotion underlying the spiritual connection people in Santa Fe and New Mexico feel toward this saint. In conversations with Archbishop Wester, I have heard him speak more about the underlying spirit of this figure. In this way, I think of the symbolism of a mother, of a woman in field of men who have named, designed who can represent what for whom. Not all people, including Indo-Hispanos of New Mexico are Catholic, but honoring the symbol of a mother is something that perhaps worth considering in the effort to heal and transcend what this figure has been used for in years past.



[^1]: While there is a large amount of research on present day realities facing communities of color, the efforts to link this to historic trauma has only begun. There are several studies that have emerged toward this end, however. Taos County has the highest rates of opioid use in the State of New Mexico and Professor Sherman makes a direct correlation between this particular issue and historic trauma for Taos. See Dana K. Sherman, “Opioid Overdose in Taos, New Mexico,” The Journal of Global Health, April 1, 2017 http://www.ghjournal.org/opioid-overdose-in-taos-new-mexico-2/ See also, Goodkind,J.,Hess,J., Gorman, B., and Parker,D. (2012). “We’re Still in a Struggle”: Dine Resilience, Survival, Historical Trauma and Healing. Qualitative Health Research, 1019-1036.
[^2]: See Robert A. Williams, Jr. The American Indian in Western Legal Thought: The Discourses of Conquest (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 74 and 59 respectively.
[^3]: See Richard Delgado, “Words that Wound: A Tort Action for Racial Insults, Epithets, and Name Calling,” in Critical Race Theory: The Cutting Edge, ed. Richard Delgado. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1995). p. 163.
[^4]: Delgado, Ibid.
[^5]: See https://longislandwins.com/news/national/no-human-being-is-illegal-and-elie-wiesel/
[^6]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp/2018/01/09/new-mexicos-education-chief-blasted-for-linking-charter-schools-with-manifest-destiny/?utm_term=.87df242bd967
[^7]: See Stephanie B. Turner, “The Case of the Zia: Looking Beyond the Trademark Law to Protect Sacred Symbols,” (2012). Student Scholarship Papers. Paper 124. http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1124&context=student_papers
[^8]: Email shared with author from Santa Fe City Clerk on April 17, 2018.
[^9]: For more information on the Seal of the University of New Mexico see: “Abolish The Racist Seal: An Open Letter to UNM Administration,” https://therednation.org/2016/04/26/abolish-the-racist-seal-an-open-letter-to-unm-administration/
[^10]: See Alicia Romero, “ Violence of Colonization Represented in UNM Seal,” The Red Nation (https://therednation.org/2016/05/09/violence-of-colonization-represented-in-unm-seal/).
[^11]: Samuel E. Sisneros, “Student Activism and the “Three Peoples” Paintings at the University of New Mexico (1970-1995): A Pictorial Essay.”
[^12]: Ronald L. Grimes, Symbol and Conquest: Public Ritual and Drama in Santa Fe (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1976) p. 234.
[^13]: See Peter P. Forrestral, trans., Benavides’ Memorial oof 1630 (Washington, D.C, 1954) pp. 23-24.
[^14]: For a detailed explanation of this translation see Fray Angelico Chavez, Our Lady of the Conquest, p. 34. no46.
[^15]: Kessell, Remote Beyond Compare, p. 87.
[^16]: Grimes, Symbol and Conquest. p. 220. 


