+++
title = 'Time'
date = 2020-09-18T15:19:54-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'capitulo'
weight = 1
+++
Temporally, New Mexico has often been divided by archaeologists into the troublesome binary of “prehistoric” and “historic”; framed by historians into distinct periods: “Pre-contact, Spanish Colonial, Mexican, Territorial and American,” all of which fail to capture the complexities of cycles and the transitions that lead up to and follow events, both cataclysmic and ordinary.  

Time here, perhaps anywhere, cannot be captured in a straight line, but rather in the symbol of a spiral and the radiating circles of cause and effect. Sometimes words, phrases or entire stories were more revealing than numbers, like emergence or Ha’atastín, the Diné word for a period remembered as “watching out for enemies.” Yet among the countless dates, there are many that hold meaning still: contact and settlement — 1539, the moment of first contact at Halona:wa Idiwana, the Middle Place, present-day Zuñi Pueblo and 1598, date of Spanish settlers arriving in New Mexico; revolutions, including that of 1680, the most successful indigenous uprising in what is now the U.S. and one that would ensure survival and rescript Pueblo-Spanish relations, or that of 1847, defined by a coalition of Pueblo and Hispanos who would rise up against U.S. imperial occupation; belonging, 1912, the date when New Mexico shifted from a Territory to a State, following over six decades of denial of full citizenship to its residents because of race and religion. In the century since this last transition, a chain of events would transpire — the rise of the military industry, the building of a bomb, development of internment camps and continual struggles over civil rights.  
 
New Mexico is indeed delicate, changing, but there are always lessons and still there is joy, but it may not lie in the grand or epic, but instead within common cycles, celebrations and ceremonies: dust rising from dances that have persisted for ages, language and prayer that rise and fall like a song, fingers moving over beads; the births and anniversaries that have resulted from love; the dignity of work, including the annual rituals of cleaning the ditch, harvesting the crops or the daily acts of simply preparing and sharing a meal.

From the beginning of time, people have gathered together to commemorate. These events, may have begun organically with the passing of an elder or the birth of a child, celebrated a harvest or marked the beginning or end of a migration. Some of these gatherings are one time events, while others evolved into traditions, defined by a recurrence from generation to generation. While some traditions emerge organically, others are intentionally invented, defined by a range from factually authentic to wholly imagined and fabricated.

### Past Commemorative Events

As noted above, there are various temporal distinctions that have been employed to understand history. Archaeologists have divided the state’s geology into the troublesome binary of “prehistoric” and “historic, ” while historians have framed its past into distinct periods: “Pre-contact,” “Spanish Colonial,” “Mexican,” “Territorial,” and “American,” all of which fail to capture the complexities of cycles and transitions that lead up to and follow events, whether cataclysmic or ordinary. These divisions also sustain the Nietzschean idea of a monumental approach to history, emphasizing static-singular events, without considering context, as well as cause and effect. In this approach, there is a failure to understand that history is dynamic. Celebrating an anniversary, for example, in and of itself is not the issue, but when a date in time is frozen (e.g. 1598, 1680, 1837, 1848, 1912) as if the people and places that made and make the celebrated event possible, do not evolve, could lead to a limited and problematic way in which history is represented and understood. 

If these temporal distinctions matter, they exist because someone has defined them. In this way, people shape the representations of the past. Understanding how the commemorative events of the 20th century come to be defined by language, symbols and narratives is dependent upon recognizing how the demographic profile and relations of rule on the ground began to shift as part of the imperial transition from Mexican rule to American rule, noted in the introduction. Even more revealing than these numbers, however, was the issue of political and economic power, which was growing steadily toward Anglo domination. As historian Charles Montgomery discovered, “At the turn of the century the newcomers controlled the territory’s new railroad and mining industries, its law firms and banks, and its largest newspapers. Anglos led both political parties and constituted virtually all federally appointed officials.”[^1] As power began to be concentrated in Anglo hands, what was celebrated and how was largely shaped by these men.

It is this context which is necessary in order to understand the mindset and pageantry that developed toward present day Fiestas in Española, Santa Fe and Taos. It defined, however, the historical antecedents and how the celebrations of fiestas developed. In what follows, are three events that give us a glimpse for what these commemorative events in New Mexico have looked like in the past. 

#### Tertio-Millennial Celebration

In 1883, when the city of Santa Fe was bypassed by the railroad, a group of community leaders — consisting  of 12 Anglo men and one sole Hispano — created an anniversary celebration in order to attract business investments and tourism[^2].

> The organizers knew perfectly well that the first official Spanish colony was established in 1598, not 1550, and that Santa Fe was not founded until 1610. But none of that really mattered. To draw the attention of eastern newspapers, they chose a date that justified an elaborate commemoration, complete with a rousing, if chaotic, potpourri of historical costumes and tableaus. The only resemblance of historical coherence came in late July, when organizers staged a trio of historical pageants, each of which was meant to recall the dramatic events of a single century. On the first two days, richly attired Spanish conquistadores and Franciscan priests shared the stage with Apaches, Zunis, and Pueblos. Day three, featuring the coming of American soldiers, brought spectators up to the modern period.[^3]

The celebration failed on many levels, including financially, where, according to Montgomery, it did not attract the desired capital investments and tourism, which was looming, but yet not fully developed. The inclination of the organizers to leverage culture, including history and the arts, was a good one; however, the failure came from a lack of imagination and the alignment of values that placed the residents of the community at the forefront. Aside from a temporal frame that was completely falsely constructed, organizers instead drew upon stereotypical representation of both Hispanic and Native Americans in which people were depicted as static and frozen in time. This wholly fabricated exposition embodied the elements of all those events that would follow, including forefronting a celebration of conquest, and the use of static moments as well as the use of the icon of the conquistadores. If the event had been invented largely by Anglo power brokers, the elite Hispanos not only relished in the narrative, but donned the roles to portray it. Felipe Delgado, for instance, proudly portrayed Coronado and Major Jose D. Sena, “attired as a Spanish Chieftain,” characterized the conquerors and “their descendants here gathered” as “Spaniards.”[^4] Thus, the framework for selective elements of the past had been established, which would continued to be solidified in the decades to come.

##### 1940 Coronado Cuarto Centennial Exposition

Six decades separate 1940 Coronado Cuarto Centennial Exposition from the Tertio-Millennial celebration. In another effort to draw upon tourism, state officials began to design a campaign in 1931 that culminated in a new exposition, a statewide tribute to the conquistador Francisco Vásquez de Coronado. At the center of the commemoration was the Coronado Entrada, a colonial expedition led by Coronado from Compostela, Mexico into present-day Kansas and through parts of the southwestern United States. The event was framed around a series of pageants that were performed on an enlarged mobile stage that toured throughout the state. Unlike the previous 1883 exposition, this one was successful in drawing tourists, which became a driving force for the event.[^5] As was true of the 1883 event, organizers decided to ignore the facts of Coronado’s devastating and deadly impact upon the Pueblo village of Tiguex to instead paint a narrative picture of a heroic and noble colonizer, and as one promotional guide noted, forming “the basis for the European civilization in the Southwest.”[^6]

As this selective narrative began to unfold through the decades in these events, and though many non-native Anglo men were involved, several Hispano supporters, primarily from “elite” families, began to buy into this narrative, including Commission Secretary Gilberto Espinosa, B.C. Hernandez, Concha Ortiz y Pino and Fabiola Cabeza de Baca. The event however, did, have its progressive detractors including folklorist Arthur Campa, who throughout the 1930s had criticized the fixation on Spanish origins, particularly at the expense of Indian and Mexican influences. Ahead of his time, in 1939, Campa became even more aggressive in his critique of Spanish heritage symbolism. In a series of essays in El Nuevo Mexicano, this young scholar called on his colleagues to recognize several key issues, including the facts of colonization where most of the settlers were men and of the fallacy of purity of blood and the primacy of Mexican culture, including indigenous ancestors.[^7] In 1940, the same year of the Exposition, education professor George I. Sanchez, would publish his critical study of Taos County, Forgotten People, which documented the impact of Anglo conquest and neglect after 1848. Like Campa, Sanchez would critique the celebration as organized by outsiders, while ignoring not only the knowledge and local customs of the people, but the issues most impacting them as well.[^8] The critique also came from the Isleta Pueblo Governor and President of the All Indian Pueblo Council, Pablo Abeyta, who called into question the honoring of a man who had killed Pueblo people and forced them into war.[^9]

##### Columbus Day and the Columbus Quincentenary

Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Americas on October 12, 1492 has been celebrated in the United States at key anniversary moments, including 1792, 1892, with the most recent 500th anniversary celebrated in 1992. While the first statewide celebration took place in 1905 in Colorado, it became a federal holiday under the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration in 1934, in an era largely marked by commemorative practice. In 1892 in New Mexico, stories were carried in the local press of Santa Fe, Silver City, Las Cruces and Las Vegas, the latter of which referred to Columbus as the “greatest educator” and invoking sentiments of manifest destiny, clarified that “he taught mankind that human destiny extends over the whole world.” As noted in the paper, the celebration was to “bring together the school children, in the country, in the same hour, to commemorate the greatest event in the modern world.”[^10]

Leading up to the 500th anniversary, as early as 1989, demonstrations began to emerge. In neighboring Denver, Colorado, 200 American Indian Movement members poured animal blood on the statue of Columbus. Interestingly enough, that same year, a national “Columbus Quincentennial Symposium” was held at the Eldorado Hotel in Santa Fe, where speakers called into question the celebrations based on more critical interrogations of more truthful accounts of the man (Columbus) and the event (1492).[^11] By 1990, however, a Santa Fe Quincentennial Committee had formed to plan activities locally, even as national counter protest efforts began to form.[^12] Tibo Chavez, Jr. was named as the chairman of the Commission and events were scheduled across New Mexico, including scholarly lectures, arts shows and re-enactments.

While efforts had been building for years, protests deepened. For some, the protests against these celebrations were quiet; the pueblo of Ohkay Owingeh simply removed Columbus Day from its calendar. More demonstrative efforts were made by groups across New Mexico, including students from the Institute of American Indian Arts who staged a “die in” at the State Capital. Other protests were also planned by Tonantzin Land Institute, the Southwest Indian Student Coalition and Moviemiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlan of the University of New Mexico. Among the many responses, perhaps the most profound centered the value of storytelling. The Institute of American Indian Arts, in collaboration with KNME-TV, the local PBS station based in Albuquerque, produced, along with Director Diane Reyna, "Surviving Columbus: The Story of the Pueblo People," a deeply imaginative film that tells the story of the Pueblo People, including the 500 year-relationship of the Pueblos and other cultures. The film won a Peabody Award that year and continues to resonate to this day.

#### Current Commemorative Events - Fiestas

The annual Feast Day Celebrations, also known as Fiestas provide us an important point to assess how memory and community intersect, how the history is sometimes as much about forgetting as it is about remembering. To understand these events, it is important to include some background. Every community settled under the Spanish empire was designated in the name of a patron saint. For instance, Santo Tomas Apostol de Abiquiú was the full name of the village known still as Abiquiú. This practice also included the renaming of indigenous villages. For instance, Kewa was renamed Santo Domingo and Ohkay Owingeh renamed San Juan de los Caballeros and in both cases, these communities have since those colonial baptisms reclaimed their original name, even if the feasts continue to honor the patron saint.[^13] Given the long history of Catholicism in New Mexico, most feast days are defined by the centrality of these patron saints, each assigned to specific days of the year. These celebrations usually consist of a mass, vespers and a procession of the saint, followed by those gathered breaking bread in community, traditions now as common in Hispanic villages as in Pueblo villages. For instance, in Acoma Pueblo, the feast honors San Esteban and in Albuquerque’s Old Town, San Felipe de Neri is at the center of a three day Fiesta.

The Fiestas de Española and Santa Fe form the primary focus of the following assessment, though a glimpse at the Fiestas in Taos is also noted below.

##### Española Fiesta

The annual event known as the Fiesta del Valle de Española celebrates the Spanish colonial founding of New Mexico and the establishment of the “first European Capital” of New Mexico on July 11, 1598. As articulated in the Fiesta Bylaws, the Fiesta is specifically held to, “commemorate and celebrate the initial conquest of New Mexico by Captain Juan de Oñate, and the establishment of his capital at San Gabriel de Los Españoles, at the confluence of the Rio Chama and the Rio Grande del Norte.”[^14]

First presented in 1932, the impetus credited to Delfin Salazar, the event struggled for significance in the first three decades, and according to Robert Naranjo, the event only occurred six times, first in the early 1930s and from 1948 - 1950.[^15] In 1969, then mayor Richard Lucero and other businessmen, reignited the Fiesta.  

Consistent with the development of “founders’ days” in other communities across the nation, Española’s Fiesta was largely defined by nostalgia and mythology, as well as a desire of its celebrants to secure a sense of belonging. Though Santa Fe’s Fiesta had already been established, in creating its own community celebration, Española took the opportunity to tell a story older still. That the date of 1598 was chosen is not surprising, since the narrative force that it carried allowed City officials and other promoters to claim that moment as the ‘birth,’ not only of the specific community of Española, but of the very origin of what would come to be known as New Mexico as whole. For those promoters, the date predated any other European settlement in what is now called the United States. Understanding these narrative choices reveals what early twentieth century Hispanos in Española felt was critical, a sense of belonging to a place.

That this founding story’ excluded indigenous communities — which were infinitely older — is also not surprising. Equally as troubling, however, was that the narrative froze time. If the metaphor of birth can be used, then everything that follows, the evolution of a being, including that of a community, is absent, failing to account for more than four centuries of history, both violent and joyful, filled with events that dramatically transformed place and people alike.

Underlying the Fiesta del Valle de Española are elements of a dominant narrative. As clearly articulated in the Fiesta Bylaws, the purpose of the event is to preserve “the historical, cultural and faith, of the colonization Don Juan de Oñate and the first families . . .” Understanding the core narrative and underlying symbols embedded in this purpose is critical, a summary of which follows:

- Conquest and Domination: Set within the language of empire, power and dominion, by emphasizing colonization, the narrative force focuses on the concept of celebrating conquest. Taken at face value, this concept fails to recognize the harm that has come from domination, and not only at the moment of the conquest, but as a theme that resonates for many in the present. Like much of northern New Mexico, the Española Valley is beset with a multitude of challenges, economic and social. There are struggles over resources (e.g. water and land), and challenges that are often largely defined by race and class, dividing not only Native Americans from Hispanics, but rich from poor. In this way, it is hard not to see the present also reflected in a narrative pageant that celebrates the defeat and supposed supremacy of one group over another. 

- First Families: The concept of ‘founding families,’ which is developed in greater detail on page ___, is complicated in places like the Española Valley, but perhaps anywhere. Aside from the fact that this concept premises a framework that is exclusive and perhaps even elitist, the idea of ‘first families’ fails to account for the fact that the settlements of the Española Valley were constantly in flux and dynamic. First, the inevitable mestizaje that followed colonization resulted in generations of racial and cultural mixture realized and defined as much by amicable unions as by coercive relations.

- A Contradiction in Terms: The phrase, “Where Cultures Unite” is highlighted in the 2017 Fiesta Bylaws, though interestingly enough, is not defined anywhere in the document. Contrary to a multicultural and harmonious, place-based concept that the phrase evokes, the reality is that the Fiesta (as defined in its bylaws and as implemented) actually promotes a static, singular perspective and not a convergence of cultures. By deconstructing this phrase, it is clear that the concept draws upon the tri-cultural narrative, which is addressed in more detail on page ___.

- 1598 - An Origin Story: According to the Fiesta Bylaws, the event is held to “commemorate and celebrate the initial conquest of New Mexico by Juan de Oñate, and the establishment of his capital at San Gabriel de Los Españoles, at the confluence of the Rio Chama and the Rio Grande del Norte.” While other expeditions and even attempted settlements predate this event, the expedition led by Oñate was indeed, the first to be royally sanctioned. It included 129 soldiers and several hundred colonists - women, servants, children and priests. Notably, at the time, there was a politics governing the racial identities of those on the expedition that was also subject to a racial hierarchy and that culminated in the erasure of people of color, in spite of clear evidence of the colony being racially diverse.[^16] In the journey up the Camino Real, the expedition stopped in Pueblo communities, where Oñate proclaimed Spain’s dominion over land and people. Finally the expedition culminated at Ohkay Owingeh, which Oñate renamed San Juan de los Caballeros, and while the party occupied the village’s dwellings, they eventually moved to a more spacious village across the river, San Gabriel. Failing to critically assess this entire narrative in the context of the domination of land and people is problematic.

- El Conquistador Oñate: At the center of the Fiesta is the symbol of ‘the conquistador,’ a product of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, which is addressed in greater detail on page 38. In the Fiesta, however, the symbolism is clearly defined in the person of Juan de Oñate himself, the conqueror who led the establishment of first permanent colony into New Mexico in 1598. There is a fair amount of research about Oñate; for instance, that he was accused of excessive violence, found guilty in 1614 of cruelty, immorality and false reporting, and permanently banished from New Mexico.[^17] The revival of this individual —who inexplicably is credited as a mythic founding father, bearer of culture and a symbol of memory, identity and heritage for the most vocal New Mexican Hispanos —did not occur until the 20th century, and continues to exist to this day.[^18] Romantically, he symbolizes for some an imagined and iconic point of Spanish origin and presence in the region, and yet, for others, the essence of colonial violence.

- Royal Court/Stereotypical Images: Set within a hierarchy of race and class, one of the salient features of the Fiesta adopted into the pageantry is that of a representative “royal court,” including the personage of ‘La Reina,” an interesting notion, in that historically, Spanish royalty never actually visited New Mexico in the colonial period. From an equity perspective, the idea of royalty is not representative in the democratic sense. In general, the literal meaning of a royalty court is defined by a small select group of individuals whose lineage is not only one of purity, but of a sovereignty that rules over others and is often articulated as God-given. Revealing the class-based hierarchy, the so-called royal assemblage of the Española Fiesta includes militia-based conquistadores, two priests, a Native American Scout, and both Spanish and Native American Princesas. 

Aside from the militaristic and aristocratic frame in which the “royal court” is portrayed, the representations in the pageant emerge as stereotypes of both Hispanic and Native Americans in which people are not only depicted as static and frozen in time, but that also fail to fully capture the complexity of New Mexican identity in history or as it evolved over time. In this way, Native Americans can only exist as Scout or Indian Princess. The image of the Indian Scout is not only a figure that comes to be incorporated in colonial enterprises, wherein a male from an indigenous tribe is incorporated as a soldier or paramilitary operator, but also a symbol of how conquest required both indigenous cooperation and ultimately, betrayal to his own natal community. In terms of the “Native American Princesa,” the fact that Pueblo inclusion is only made possible within this framework of Spanish royalty is problematic. Like her counterpart, the Scout, she is also symbolic and set in a context of the historic portrayal of Native American women as either Queens or Princesses, particularly from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, by European and American artists.[^19] In these depictions, Hispanics also can only exist as colonial agents: the Spanish Queen and court, priests, soldiers, and conquerors, each flat and debilitating.

###### Responses

Resistance and response to the Española Fiesta can be traced to different periods in time. 

In 2001, the Española Fiesta Council, led by youth members calling themselves “La Verdad,” changed the title of “La Reina” to that of “La Señorita Valoria La Mestiza,” a shift that accordingly recognized the area’s bloodlines, including Spanish and Indian, to which Laura Vigil, the 24-year old who was portraying ‘La Mestiza,’ remarked, “We’re all mixed.” According to media coverage, Vigil “wore a simple white peasant blouse with matching skirt and silver and turquoise crown.” At the time, the council was led by then 19-year old Carlos Trujillo, who recently communicated with me indicating that the response from leaders at Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo was that the action taken by the new Council was “mediocre at best,” and so with little will in the new Council, the position was reverted two years later back to ‘La Reina.’[^20] This same year, the Council stripped Oñate of traditional sword and battle gear.”[^21]

In a 2014 opinion piece published in Green Fire Times, Historian Matthew Martine, Ph.D. highlighted the banishment of Oñate and encouraged the Council to consider thinking his exile as an important feature of the Fiesta. 

In 2017, in an unprecedented act of humility, Ralph Martinez, who was portraying Oñate, participated in the Fiesta of neighboring Santa Fe, walked with Dezmund Marcus, who was portraying the Native Scout; and without armor, including sword, they both knelt to pray “in solidarity with indigenous brothers and sisters,” toward “promoting unity.” In a symbol act, Martinez also helped plant trees at the Tewa Women’s United’s Healing Food’s Oasis. 

In 2018, with the election of a new mayor, Javier Sánchez, appointed a new Community Relations Commission tasked with altering the town's July Fiesta celebration. The change was inspired by critics who say the old version glorified conquest and domination of Pueblo peoples.

As noted above, in 2018, the City created a Community Relations Commission (CRC), charged with the objective of working to navigate in community tensions based on historic trauma, but also identify opportunities to celebrate the community authentically, a commission I have served as an advisor. Second, the City, which has operated the Fiesta dissolved its legal and administrative charge to do so, which has resulted in some members of the community deciding to create a separate nonprofit 501C3 to continue the ‘Onate themed’ Fiesta. These new organizers have announced that while Fiesta will not take place in 2018, they have indicated their intention to incorporate and to continue the event in the future as it has been done in the past.

That the municipality has disentangled itself from the event is good and that they have created a commission that is charged with a broader responsibility of bringing the community together is also very positive. As transition, in July, the City of Española presented “Ferias de Española,” which was accomplished without the colonialist flair, prefacing instead a “Fair” to unite the community. Officials in Española view these efforts as progress, and there is much to be applauded, particularly the courage of Española leadership to confront this challenge head on, which happened, I believe because of community based leadership, including that of Roger Montoya and Ralph Martinez. There continue to be fault lines, however, particularly as the new group organizing the Fiesta is determined to re-ignite the Fiesta as it has been.  A plan to mount the first iteration for an inclusive celebration is set for Friday and Saturday, September 21-22 2018. The Northern New Mexico Harvest Festival coincides with the summer equinox and will include a free community meal, farmers market and a a procession honoring ‘Living Treasures’ which will travel from the historic Plaza in Santa Cruz de la Cañada to the modern plaza on the west side of the city. In addition, the CRC noted it would showcase regional artists and hand crafted works and a performance venue will be provided for music, dance and storytelling. The Community Relations Commission proposes four regional celebrations at the equinox and solstice points in the ancient agricultural calendar as a way to anchor our work at the confluence of the Rio Grande and Chama rivers.

##### Santa Fe Fiesta-Entrada

The annual Fiesta de Santa Fe is a series of annual events, including the element of a historical enactment that was invented in the early 20th century and which has become increasingly controversial. These events follow a call for applications for candidates to portray the figures of the historical seventeenth century governor, Diego de Vargas and a wholly imagined figure of the fiesta queen, “La Reina de La Fiesta.” The formal Fiesta is initiated in June with a week of Catholic masses held as noted in the official schedule, in “honor of Don Diego de Vargas’ request for a special intercessory grace upon his arrival in 1692” and culminates with three days of events in September, including what is known as the “Entrada de Don Diego de Vargas.”[^22] While the Fiesta elicits multiple sentiments across the community, including one of the only moments throughout the year when generational residents of Santa Fe gather in the plaza, a space that has dramatically shifted in the past century reflecting the impact of gentrification and displacement.[^23] For this group of Hispanos, the plaza in particular, though the east side of Santa Fe generally, represents an arena for struggles over power, resources and values and the story is one of loss. So for this one point in the year, the presence on the plaza is symbolic.

Yet, for others, the event of the Entrada is an unconscionable celebration of patriarchy and colonialism, at the heart of an invented tradition. In spite of the sense that resistance to the event is new, tensions that have actually existed for decades, and have only continued to escalate in the past several years.

To understand the significance of the controversies associated with contemporary Fiesta, it is necessary, however, to look more closely at both the historical accounts it represents and the arc of its own creation, through its evolution, to the present moment. The origin of this event can be traced to an idea first conceived when twelve men gathered in Santa Fe on September 16, 1712. The men were friends and admirers of the recently deceased Governor Diego de Vargas and their recollections at that meeting were more nostalgic than historical. In documenting their meeting, they noted that the purpose was toward “recalling how this Villa [of Santa Fe] had been conquered on the fourteenth day of September of the past year of sixteen hundred and ninety-two by the General Don Diego de Vargas.”[^24] Before analyzing 1712, it is important to contextualize first, the moment of 1692. The goal of the expedition, as with other previous expeditions and others that would follow, was to re-conquer the land and lay claim to it for a distant king, an ideology based on relations of rule defined by power and politics. The fact that the Act of Possession was articulated at every Pueblo and that according to Vargas’ report to his superiors, that thousands of soles were absolved and that finally, 969 children were baptized, all must be understood within the larger frame of colonialism.[^25] History is power and in 1692, the court chronicler, Carlos Siguenza y Gongora was charged with recounting the campaign in detail, celebrating the the reconquest, which he noted had taken place “without wasting a single ounce of power or unsheathing a sword....”[^26] Understanding the power of history and memory is also probably what most defined that cold rainy day in in Santa Fe in 1712.

Even though most of these men gathered in 1712 had lived through some of that history, their recollection was as much defined by forgetting as it was remembering, a selective storytelling. First, because it focuses on this moment as “bloodless” thus inferring that there was an acceptance, it was perhaps the first moment, when the notion of harmonious cultures was first spun, today an ideology that is often historically set in the late 19th century. Second, they did not choose the date of the Villa’s Spanish settlement in 1610, so unlike the founding moment that would play out in other places, here, the salient moment was re-conquest. This may have been because most of these men were actually new recruits who had arrived in New Mexico with the de Vargas expedition. Third, in the document, they also choose not to mention the seven decades that had led up to the 1680 Pueblo Revolt, a definitive experience no matter the perspective, including for two of the assembled, Antonio and Salvador Montoya, whose families had survived that revolt. Finally, and most notably, as priest-historian Fray Angélico Chávez mused in 1953 evidently, these men “wished to ignore [the] second and more important Entrada,” the one that took place in 1693.[^27] That definitive event was far from bloodless; eighty-one Pueblo people died and of the over four-hundred that surrendered, all were sentenced to serve ten years of servitude among the Spaniards.[^28] The conquest and resistance did not end with this 1693 entrada either; the reconquest, in many ways would be more of a process than a singular date, yet still marked by all of the elements that characterize war in a colonial setting, including violence, cooperation, and resistance.[^29]

By the time these twelve men left the gathering in 1712, they had penned a decree, however, calling for a commemoration to be held in the future on the fourteenth of September with “Vespers, Mass, sermon, and a procession through the Main Plaza. . . . “in honor of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross” to be “celebrated for all time.”[^30] Given the centrality that has been placed in the icon of ‘La Conquistadora,’ it is notable that nowhere in the proclamation is the Marion figure mentioned by name or otherwise. Also, aside from the 1712 recollection, it is how the date continues to be represented and mythologized. Contrary to what is often depicted by the Fiesta Council, and as many may believe, that Fiesta is an uninterrupted commemoration from 1712 to the present, this assertion is simply not accurate. The same myth was being propagated as early as 1953, when Fray Angelico Chavez himself noted, that there is no documented evidence that the event actually even took place at all. He makes a conjecture that it may have actually “only been observed in that year of 1712” though presumes that it could have lasted as long as its key author, Juan Páez Hurtado was alive. Indeed, though civil and ecclesiastical authorities in New Mexico were meticulous record keepers, there is no record found to date that reveals that the Fiesta took place in Santa Fe following this date in the colonial period. Interestingly enough, even under Mexican rule, there is a 1844 call for celebrating Mexican Independence, coincidently on the same date, of the 1712 gathering — September 16th — which coincides with Mexican Independence in 1821, in which there is no mention of that commemoration at all.[^32]

In reality, though there is no record of the observance of Fiesta in the fashion called for in the 1712 proclamation, it could be said that Catholic celebrations inevitably did take place, including the observance of Corpus Christi and veneration of La Conquistadora. Santa Fe was originally, after all, a distinctively Catholic locale and given the centrality of the church, there is no reason to believe that some religious ceremonies did not take place aligned to liturgical calendars. While, there is no evidence of the celebration of re-conquest after 1712, the concept does seem to be recovered and reinvented in the late nineteenth century, as pure pageantry. As noted above, the introduction of the pageant of conquistadores— specifically Coronado— is first accomplished with the Tertio-Millennial Exposition in 1883, and in 1893, at the 200th Anniversary of the 1693 Re-conquest (emphasis added to the year) the city’s residents are introduced for the first time to figure of De Vargas, if not in a pageant, certainly in print.[^33]

The historical enactment, which is core to the entrada, however, where a man portrays Diego de Vargas does not actually get presented to the public until 1911, when the idea of modern Fiesta is perhaps first introduced, the brainchild of Episcopal minister James Mythen. Part of the impetus for civic leaders was economic, the desire to increase tourism to the city, though the invention, however, reflected a growing national trend in that era of costumed historical vignettes and theatricality that had swept across the United States. In subsequent decades, the Fiesta would continue to evolve under the leadership of the founder of the Museum of New Mexico, Edgar Hewett, and others, who upon arriving in Santa Fe, began a gradual reimagining that idealized a mythic past, place and people at the expense of the actual complexity of the population and their experiences. While other scholars tracing the history of the Santa Fe Fiesta have analyzed in some depth the evolution of these event in the first few decades especially, suffice it to say that it is a story of politics, perspectives on race and class and above all, reflects a contest of wills, primarily men and the institutions that they were a part of.[^34]

In tracing the origins of the Fiestas, particularly the definitive decade of the 1920s, historian Charles Montgomery writes that the “Santa Fe Fiesta was born of both Hispano-Catholic memory and Anglo contrivance.”[^35] Though published in 1976, Ronald L. Grimes’ Symbol and Conquest: Public Ritual and Drama in Santa Fe, an anthropological analysis of the Fiestas, particularly in the fifth, sixth and seventh decades of the  twentieth century, remains one of the most in-depth studies of the Santa Fe Fiesta. His analysis includes the Fiesta’s organizational structures and their intersections, at least as they existed in the 1973 — civic (the Fiesta Council); religious (the Cofraternity of La Conquistadora, 1770s-1846; 1956); civil (the City Council) and ethno-civic-religious (the Caballeros de Vargas). Although Grimes notes the challenges faced in locating the scripts for the Entrada, which as he notes “are carefully guarded by the Caballeros” his analysis includes review of at least two of the scripts, one written in 1958 and the other in 1967, the latter of which was slightly modified in the 1973 performance.[^36]   

In order to understand contemporary Fiesta, however, and the growing protests around it, it will be necessary to take an even closer look at the existing core narratives and underlying symbols embedded therein. While the scripts have varied over time, the one that is in use most recently is defined by three salient moments in the re-enactment: 1) Civil Act of Possession Articulated; 2) Religious Act of Possession Articulated; 3) Pardon of Pueblo Indians Articulated; 4) Baptism of Pueblo People; 5) Articulation of the Fiestas for all Times; 6) All asked to Venerate and Kneel before Cross. The Entrada also is based on the following core elements:

- Conquest and Domination: One of the primary issues for contemporary observers is how startling it is that what is celebrated is the defeat and supposed supremacy of one group over another. Set within the language of empire, power and dominion, by emphasizing colonization, the underlying story and narrative force focuses on the concept of celebrating conquest. As Grimes argues, “what occurred [in 1692] may have been bloodless, but it was still a conquest.”[^37] Taken at face value, this concept fails to recognize the harm that has come from domination, and not only at the moment of the conquest, but as a theme that resonates for many in the present. There are living communities that upon experiencing this, witnessing this internalize the story of defeat. Although the story already establishes the divide between Native Americans and Hispanics, the reaction and impulse to potential solutions is also based on this divide, but the reality is that on the ground, this is much more complicated that these binaries allow. So, anyone who is witnessing and participating is in the end impacted by that story, including Native Americans and Hispanics.

- 1692 - A renewed origin Story: Although this narrative of different periods (Native American, Spanish, Mexican and American) is part of a play in progress that is included early on, it gradually evolves to focus on the singular date of 1692. As noted above, this focus is not only inaccurate to the actual history. Living history means learning from it. If the goal is to reveal the challenges of the last few decades of the seventeenth century, which hold lessons of both clashes between cultures, as well as a cooperation.

- El Conquistador De Vargas: At the center of the Fiesta is the symbol of ‘the conquistador,’ a product of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In the Fiesta, however, the symbolism is clearly defined in the person of Vargas himself, the man who is credited with re-establishing the Spanish colony, following the Pueblo Revolts of 1680 and 1696. Unlike the figure of Oñate, Vargas was not tried by his peers for crimes of excessive violence by his peers, though he was placed under house arrest for nearly three years, accused by the six-member Santa Fe cabildo with several charges, including misappropriation of funds and fomenting Indian resistance, which he was ultimately released and exonerated from and even re-appointed as Governor of New Mexico in 1703, only to die in Bernalillo in 1704. Although the life of Vargas was interesting, the ways in which he would be memorialized would in many ways reveal less about him and more about those distinctively twentieth century memorials, including a shopping mall. None would glorify and mythologize the man more, however, than the impersonations that would come more than two centuries later and should be analyzed in greater depth.

  The list of those portraying De Vargas reveals an interesting register.[^38] Even in its early inception, those portraying De Vargas like 33 year old George Washington Armijo, would represented the most elite Hispanos in the region. Although Armijo was the first to portray De Vargas, in the register, the first who plays him as part of Fiesta in 1921 is local resident and Anglo, Emory Moore. For many, the position would also come to serve as a virtual stepping stone for Hispanos aspiring to enter into the civil activities of the City, including politics.   

  The selection process for candidates wishing to portray this conquistador would be narrowed over time and would require the following taken directly from a 2018 call for candidates: must be of Spanish descent and have a Spanish surname; must speak Spanish effectively; must have been born in the State of New Mexico and must be a Santa Fe County resident for a minimum of five (5) years; and must be at least between the ages of 21 and 50 years old 

- Royal Court: Set within a hierarchy of race and class, one of the salient features of the Fiesta is that of a representative “royal court,” including the personage of ‘La Reina,” which was first introduced in Santa Fe in 1927. Spanish royalty never actually visited New Mexico in the colonial period. From an equity perspective, the idea of royalty is not representative in the democratic sense. In general, the literal meaning of a royalty court is defined by a small select group of individuals whose lineage is not only one of purity, but of a sovereignty that rules over others and is often articulated as God-given, thus reveals a class-based pretensions being espoused.

  The selection process of the Queen would require the following: must be of Spanish descent and have a Spanish surname; must speak Spanish effectively; must have been born in the State of New Mexico and must be a Santa Fe County resident for a minimum of five (5) years. There are two key differences from the selection process for the DeVargas character. First, unlike the age of the conquistador, who can be up to 50 years old, the Reyna must be between 21 and 35 years old. While there is also no requirement noted for DeVargas in terms of marital status or virginity, for the candidates for Reyna, they must “never been married, nor shall she do so throughout her entire reign,” nor “shall not have any children, nor shall she become pregnant throughout her entire reign.”

- Stereotypical Images: Aside from the militaristic and aristocratic frame in which a military and “royal court” is portrayed, the representations in the pageant emerge as stereotypes of both Hispanic and Native Americans in which people are not only depicted as static and frozen in time, but that also fail to fully capture the complexity of New Mexican identity in history or as it evolved over time. In this way, Native Americans can only exist as Scout or Indian Princess. The image of the Indian Scout is not only a figure that comes to be incorporated in colonial enterprises, wherein a male from an indigenous tribe is incorporated as a soldier or paramilitary operator, but also a symbol of how conquest required both indigenous cooperation and ultimately, betrayal to his own natal community. In terms of the “Native American Princesa,” the fact that Pueblo inclusion is only made possible within this framework of Spanish royalty is problematic. Like her counterpart, the Scout, she is also symbolic and set in a context of the historic portrayal of Native American women as either Queens or Princesses, particularly from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, by European and American artists. In these depictions, Hispanics also can only exist as colonial agents: the Spanish Queen and court, priests, soldiers, and conquerors, each flat and debilitating. These offensive portrayals erase entire cultures, collapse others, and fail to account for the ethnic mixtures resulting from indigenous, European and African cultural convergence in New Mexico history.

##### Responses

For years, there was a resistance to the Fiesta Entrada that has only continued to gain momentum. Last year, the 2017 Fiestas were defined by a protest that could have easily escalated into a riot. Over 100 individuals, including members of The Red Nation, an Albuquerque based political group dedicated to the liberation of indigenous people and the University of New Mexico’s Kiva Club encountered a flank of police on the ground and on surrounding rooftops, all culminating in eight arrests, though charges were eventually dropped. For several months since that clash, as national news featured these events and the growing antagonism, a broad network of supporters calling for the abolishment of the Entrada has taken place. This has included the All Pueblo Council of Governors (APCG) passing Resolution No. APCG 2017-20 on December 14, 2017 that outlines a “conceptual framework” that serves as action steps toward reconciliation for future generations. 

Though it may seem as if resistance to Fiesta is new, in reality, it has long reflected the continued evolution of the modern Fiesta in the 20th century. In 1963, following internal disputes with the Fiesta Council, the Archdiocese of Santa Fe announced that it would withdraw its participation in Fiesta, though three years later it was reaffirmed. Forty years before the 2017 APCG Resolution, in 1977, the All Indian Pueblo Council expressed their disapproval of the re-enactment of the Entrada. The response was initiated when a letter sent by Gilbert Valdez, chairman of the Fiesta Council requested that Native American vendors not be allowed to sell underneath the portal during the Fiesta. The letter sparked a reaction that led to the AIPC voting to support a boycott of Fiestas and also served as a catalyst to begin planning efforts for a 300th anniversary of the Pueblo Revolt.[^39] Chairman of the AIPC Delfin Lovato illuminated a simmering reality when he noted, “We go to Fiesta, not because we want to participate in the Fiestas, but as a matter of economic necessity. I think I speak for 99% of Pueblo People when I say they think of the Fiesta about the pageantry about the so-called conquest as a farce anyway.”[^40]

Since 1977, resistance and response has ebbed and flowed, but one of the most incisive responses to Fiesta and the Entrada in particular, came from the intersection of arts, technology and history in 1992. Thanks to the skill and production of Jeanette DeBouzek and Diane Reyna, their 1992 production of Gathering Up Again: Fiesta in Santa Fe frames the imperative of perspective in focusing on three individuals participants. Although the film is now over two decades old, it continues to serve as important window into this event.[^41]

The dust that the Santa Fe Fiesta raises annually actually never fully settles, and yet the tensions that have continued to escalate have begun to feel much heavier than dust. In fact, no single metaphor fully captures the complexity and a contest over memory that is played out year after year in terms that are imagined and symbolic and yet manifest in real spaces and across socio-political relations. In recent years, the entrada has been justified in the name of tradition, though it is not actually grounded in the full history and wisdom of the people it allegedly represents.

Over the past year, as noted above, I participated in dialogues that have taken place with  the All Pueblo Council of Governors, the Catholic Church/Archdiocese of Santa Fe and the Office of the Mayor, City of Santa Fe. This year, in 2018, this effort expanded to include formal meetings with the leadership of Santa Fe Fiesta Council and the Caballeros Vargas, the entity responsible for the Entrada. This collaborative effort based on face-to-face respectful and constructive dialogue over the past few months has culminated in the reconciliation effort that includes the discontinuation and complete transformation of an event. These efforts have taken considerable courage and leadership. In many ways it began when former Governor of Cochiti Pueblo, Regis Pecos reached out and asked me to accompany him to a meeting with the Archbishop John Wester which turned to meetings with Mayor Javier Gonzales and presentations before the All Pueblo Council of Governors. Concomitantly, President of Caballeros de Vargas Thomas Baca-Gutierrez sent letters to all Pueblo governors, noting, “It is my wish and my hope that I can sit down with you (and all the other Governors as well) to explore ways that we can peacefully celebrate our blended cultures and traditions of unity.” The courage taken by President Baca-Gutierrez continued when these meetings were expanded with convenings done by Mayor Alan Webber. Recognizing the imperative, where these leaders have arrived is monumental, and though transformation is on the horizon, the work of reconciliation is ahead of all of us over the next few years.

##### Taos Fiesta

Like the Española and Santa Fe Fiestas, the Fiesta of Taos has long functioned as an event that reflects a romanticized and mythic sense of place, people and the past itself. Its gradual evolution also reveals how space and event function as important arenas in the struggle over values, power, and the politics of representation and belonging. The Taos Fiesta as it is known today is like its neighbors in Santa Fe and Española, a product of the early 20th century. Its evolution, however, began at the turn of the century when town merchants recognized the feast day that evidently long taken place at Taos Pueblo and how it could be leveraged. While ceremonies at the pueblo had long coincided with different calendars and relationships, synchronicity and a cultural braiding included the incorporation of the feast day that was superimposed when the first mission church was built by Spanish clergy at the pueblo in 1619, which was named for San Geronimo, the fourth century patron saint most associated as a historian and writer. Between 1902, when a flyer appears, promoting three-day schedule for “San Geronimo Feast and Taos given in the old and Quaint Town of Taos” for a little more than two decades efforts were made to create a celebration to complement the pueblo’s feast day. 

By the 1930s, the impetus was to create a separate festival, one that capitalized fully on the summer tourism. Anthropologist and Taos native, Sylvia Rodriguez, has completed the most in-depth research about the invented Taos Fiesta, particularly in her examination of power and social relations, important not only for understanding Taos specifically, but other Fiestas as well. Rodriguez traces the festival, as she notes, from “its invention by an elite group of Anglo boosters in 1930s, to its control by a select Hispanic fiesta council in the 1990s.” Aside from her work to trace the historical evolution of these celebrations, Rodriguez also analyzes the development and contestation of community memory deeply embedded in the celebration, including issues of identity, language, gender and race all have and continue to play in both the programming and in the politics of its production.[^42]

At the symbolic level, the early 1930 reinvented Taos Fiesta centered two patron saints, Santa Ana and Santiago.[^43] Santa Ana was recognized as the grandmother of Jesus Christ and mother of the Virgin Mary. Santiago, or the apostle James, came to be widely accepted as the patron saint of Spain in the 17th century, though Pope Clement XIII removed the designation in 1760 and named him patron of Spaniards.[^44] The reverence to Saint James in Spain came from legend, where he is said to have miraculously appeared at the Battle of Clavijo, helping the Christians conquer the Muslim Moors, thus the popular way in which he would be represented and recognized by, Santiago Matamoros, Saint James the Moor-slayer. Historian Jean Mitchell-Lanham has noted, “While this event [itself] is based on legend, the supposed battle has provided one of the strongest ideological icons in the Spanish national identity.” The alignment of Saint James in New Mexico is not necessarily a new story. Notably, given the absence of this narrative in the Santa Fe Fiesta, in the reconquest of 1693 as the Spanish forces began the battle against Puebloan people who were in Santa Fe, according to historian John L. Kessell, “they yelled the Santiago and charged.”[^45] The leader of the charge, Diego de Vargas, himself a member of the military Order of Santiago, had come from a long line of knights of Santiago.[^46] In contrast to the way in which Saint Jerome is represented, as healer and writer, the iconography that most defines Saint James is associated with Spanish colonization and thus is almost always depicted in the militaristic terms of the conquistador. That civic leaders in Taos choose this icon is perhaps intentional, particularly in its association with Spain and with conquest.

___

More commemorative events will take place. As humans, there seems to be a propensity to celebrate and to remember our past. As Bell Hooks notes, “Remembering makes us subjects in history.” The question is what do we remember and celebrate? There are moments like 1680 that are the reverse of celebrating colonialism, but instead, the resistance to it. In 2030, less than 12 years away, is the 350th anniversary of the Pueblo Revolt. It is a historically important event, one that has perhaps not been fully recognized for its significance. Toward a heightened consciousness, and a reversal of perspective, what would it look like if government entities or even private organizations began to design and organize this event with the same interest and investment that characterized those three that are noted above? Certainly, it is an historical event, as contentious as any. For some it represents one of the first and greatest revolutions and points of resistance to Spanish domination. For others, it represents the death of ancestors, an interruption and loss, but like any commemorative event, it is important not only to trace what led up to this event, but also what followed. The facts are, that the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 rewrote Spanish-Pueblo policy and while the centuries that followed were not without contention and violence, it dramatically shifted those relationships positively. There are also events that followed, like the “1837 Rebellion of Rio Arriba.” that marked a cooperative effort of cross cultural convergence that marked a resistance to a common enemy, an event that has unfortunately been largely forgotten. 

More than a focus on singular events, however, questions before us, are how can commemorations of the past take place within a de-colonial framework, if at all? How do we ensure that we are not not failing to recognize the complexity of history and even further replicated the harms that come from representing it? Above, all, how do we ensure that what is celebrated is truthful and raises all voices? There is another set of events that merit attention in this work of decolonization, events that also are based on singular dates, but that unlike the preceding, take place annually

[^1]: Charles Montgomery, The Spanish Redemption: Heritage, Power, and Loss on the New Mexico’s Upper Rio Grande. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002, pp.  7-8. 
[^2]: The Santa Fe Tertio-Millennial Anniversary Association was comprised of a Board of Directors, including W. W. Griffin, L. W. Bradford Prince, Adolph Seligman, Arthur Boyle, Charles W. Greene, Solomon Spiegelberg, E. L. Bartlett, W.v. Hayt, W. T. Thorton, A. Staab, Lehman Spiegelberg and Romulo Martinez, the sole native-born New Mexican.
[^3]: Ibid,  Montgomery, pp. 93-97.
[^4]: See Wayne Mauzy, “The Tertio-Millennial Exposition,” El Palacio 37 (24) december 1934, pp. 185-99.
[^5]: As the director of the Tourist Bureau, which was promoting the newly established tagline for New Mexico, “Land of Enchantment,” noted, “Coronado was unsuccessful in his search [for gold], but the celebration that honors his journey in 1940 should mean gold for New Mexico.” Even if not completely financially successful, there was an increase in visitors. By 1935, visitorship reached a zenith of 2.7 million, four times the state’s population. Mary Irene Severns, “Tourism in New Mexico: The Promotional Activities of the New Mexico State Tourism Bureau, 1935-1950” (Master’s thesis, University of New Mexico, 1951). 1-77.
[^6]: CCC-RC. Fergusson, “The Coronado Cuarto Centennial,” 67-68.
[^7]: A.L. Campa, “The New Generation,” “Juan de Onate was Mexican: The Coronado Cuarto Centennial and the ‘Spaniards,’” and “Our Spanish Character,” in Arthur L. Campa and the Coronado Cuarto Centennial, ed. Anselmo F. Arellano and Julian Josue Vigil (Las Vegas, New Mexico: Editorial Telarana, 1980), 26, 34035, 43-44.
[^8]: El Taoseno, April 17, 1940, as cited in Sylvia Rodriguez, “The Taos Fiesta: Invented Tradition and the Infrapolitics of Symbolic Reclamation,”  Journal of the Southwest, Vol. 39, No. 1 (Spring, 1997), pp. 37.
[^9]: Taos Review, June 6, 1940 as cites in Rodriguez, p. 37.
[^10]: Las Vegas Free Press, Las Vegas, New Mexico, May 20, 1892.
[^11]: Robert Mayer, “Goodbye Columbus,” Santa Fe Reporter, October 19, 1989, p. 9.
[^12]: Clay Evans, “Two Views of the Columbus Voyage,” Santa Fe Reporter, December 26, 1990, p. 23.
[^13]: In 2005, officials reclaimed the name of Ohkay Owingeh and the village named in the 17th century as Santo Domingo officially changed its name to Kewa Pueblo in 2009, altering its seal, signs and letterhead.
[^14]: See Fiesta del Valle de Español, Chapter 45; Bylaws of the Fiesta del Valle de Española, passed, approved and adopted by the Governing Body of the City of Española, March 28, 2017.
[^15]: See Robert Robert A. Naranjo, “History of the Fiesta del Valle de Española y Oñate,” http://valleydailypost.com/history-fiesta-del-valle-de-espanola-y-onate.
[^16]: In her writing and research, historian Martha Menchaca has noted that there was a racial politics to the settlement of New Mexico, wherein detailed information was specifically recorded on White soldiers, while there was concerted erasure of people of color on the expedition. In spite of the erasure, the registries actually reveal that the most of the colonists were not actually Spanish born peninsulars. These records also give us a glimpse of a few of the women, another category of individuals that is often erased in these early records. See Martha Menchaca, Recovering History Constructing Race: The Indian, Black and White Roots of Mexican Americans. (University of Texas Press: Austin, 2001, pp. 81-88.
[^17]: Marc Simmons wrote the biography of Oñate, and though it lends itself to a more positive than critical assessment, Simmons does document (without citation) the accusations, trial and sentencing. Also included in the biography are the final years of Oñate’s life working to unsuccessfully exonerate his name.  See Marc Simmons, The Last Conquistador: Juan de Oñate and the Settling of the Far Southwest, University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, 1991, pp 187-195.
[^18]: In 1901, poet, novelist and lawyer, Eusebio Chacón, gave a speech at a rally to protest an inflammatory article by Nellie Snyder in which she articulated her aversion to Hispano Catholicism. In the speech, Chacón not only spoke to the issue of degradation noted by Snyder, which evidently articulated a negative illustration of mestisaje (racial mixture), but countered, “No blood runs through my veins other than the one Don Juan de Oñate brought, and the one later brought by the illustrious ancestors of my name.”(En mis venas ninguna sangre circula si no es la que trajo Don Juan de Oñate, y que trajeron después los ilustres antepasados de mi nombre.”) See La Voz del Pueblo, November 2, 1901, reprinted in Anselmo Arellano, “El Discurso Elocuente Nuevo-Mexicano,” New Mexico State Records Center and Archives.
[^19]: See: http://clements.umich.edu/exhibits/online/american-encounters/american-encounters-women.php.
[^20]: Communications with Carlos Trujillo by text took place on March 25, 2018.
[^21]: See Stone, Marissa, “Changing of the Guard: Española crowns La Mestiza,” Santa Fe New Mexican, Santa Fe, July 9, 2001, page 1.  Also, editorial, “Fiesta Changes Boost Community,” Albuquerque Journal, Albuquerque, July 8, 2001, page?
[^22]: See the website for the Santa Fe Fiesta Council, https://www.santafefiesta.org
[^23]: Although tracing the changes that have taken place over the past century may be revealing, even the past 50 years illustrates how tourism, the arts, upscale dining and retail had dramatically transformed the core of Santa Fe, residents who could no longer afford to live close to Downtown moved to the outskirts. Early waves of gentrification in 1960s and 1970s were foundational in terms of the current population in the north and east sides of town, which is primarily limited to a retirement community, with 66% of residents aged 60 or over. Overall, 70% of Downtown residents are White and based on research from 2009-2013, median household income was about $60,162, higher than the Santa Fe Urban Area’s at $51,278. For more in-depth information, see Human Impact Partners, Equitable Development and Risk of Displacement: Profiles of Four Santa Fe Neighborhoods,  2015.
[^24]: See, record # 179, “Order obliging the citizens of Santa Fe to celebrate “en adelante el dia de Setiembre” of each year as the anniversary of the re-conquest of the said Villa by Diego de Vargas,  September 16, 1712’ Spanish Archives of New Mexico, Vol. II, ed. R. E. Twitchell. Torch Press, 1914.
[^25]: See Diego de Vargas to Conde de Galve, Santa Fe, 16 Oct. 1692, Archivo General de la Nación, HIstoria 37: 6, Mexico City, Mexico and The Mercurio Volante of don Carlos de Siguenza y Gongora: An Account of the First Expedition of don Diego de Vargas into New Mexico in 1692, trans. Irving A. Leonard (Los Angeles, 1932), both cited in John L. Kessell, Remote Beyond Compare: Letters of don Diego de Vargas to His Family from New Spain and New Mexico, 1675-1706.
[^26]: Following the first of de Vargas’ visits back into New Mexico, the event was described in a news bulletin as having taken place “without wasting a single ounce of power or unsheathing a sword. . .” See L. Kessell, Kiva, Cross and Crown: The Pecos Indians and New Mexico, 1540-1840. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1990, p. 254.

[^27]: For translation of the proclamation and commentary, see Fray Angélico Chávez, “The First Santa Fe Fiesta Council, 1712,” New Mexico Historical Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 3, July 1953) pp. 183–85.
[^28]: Kessell, Ibid, p. 262.
[^29]: There was, in fact another, perhaps lesser known, revolt, but the 1696 Pueblo Revolt, was according to J. Manuel Espinosa, the “last serious effort by the Pueblo Indian medicine men and war chiefs, and their embattled warriors to drive out the Spanish,” and the Spanish victory was the final stage in securing the reconquest and the permanence of the Spanish settlements in northern New Mexico.” See The Pueblo Indian Revolt of 1696 and the Franciscan Missions in New Mexico, trans and ed, J. Manuel Espinosa. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988, p.3.
[^30]: See Ralph E. Twitchell, Spanish Archives of New Mexico, Vol. IV. , p 
[^31]: Juan Páez Hurtado died on May 5, 1724. Chávez, Ibid, p. 190. 
[^32]: On July 28, 1844 Governor Martínez de Lejanza ordered that a “patriotic council” be organized in Santa Fe, in order to celebrate Mexican Independence.  See  Governor Martínez de Lejanza, “Acta de la instalación de la Patriótica para la celebridad del aniversario de la Independencia Mejicana en la Ciudad de Santa Fe, Capital del Departamento de Nuevo Méjico el día 16 de Setiembre, 1844.” For full proceedings of the Junta Patriotica, see MANM, Roll 37, frames 564-600. Though beyond the scope of this project, I have analyzed this event as a pivotal moment in Spanish - Ute relations, and even in the planning of this event, reveals colonial violence against indigenous peoples. See Estevan Rael-Galvez, Identifying Captivity and Capturing Identity: Narratives of American Indian Slavery In Colorado and New Mexico, 1776-1934, Ph.D Dissertation, University of Michigan, 2002, pp. 115-119.
[^33]: The New Daily Mexican ran an article on June 10, 1893, “De Vargas Vow,” accentuating the story of “when the intrepid De Vargas reconquered the Pueblo Indians that held barbaric sway in this city,” and pointed to a called the attention to their readers to the “beautiful procession which will form at the cathedral and proceed to the Rosario chapel tomorrow afternoon.” This is fully cited in Chris Wilson’s The Myth of Santa Fe - Creating a Modern Regional Tradition, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1997, p. 189.  According to historian Charles Montgomery, superintendent of Public instruction Amado Chavez “distributed excerpts of the Vargas diary to educators across the United States.” that same year of 1893. Montgomery, Ibid, p. 133.
[^34]: See Grimes, Symbol and Conquest; Montgomery, “Discovering “Spanish Culture” at the Santa Fe Fiesta, 1919-1936,” Chapter 4, Ibid, pp. 128- 157.
[^35]: Montgomery, Ibid, p. 129. 
[^36]: Grimes, Ibid, pp. 152-212.
[^37]: Grimes, Ibid, p. 167.
[^38]: https://www.santafefiesta.org/history-of-fiesta-de-santa-fe/
[^39]: “Pueblos Vote For Boycott in Santa Fe,” Albuquerque Journal, Sept. 16, 1977.
[^40]: Indians to Sell During Fiesta,” Las Cruces Sun News, Sept. 9, 1977.
[^41]: http://www.folkstreams.net/film-detail.php?id=160
[^42]: See two articles by anthropologist Sylvia Rodriguez: “Fiesta Time and Plaza Space: Resistance and Accommodation in a Tourist Town,” The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 111, No. 439 (Winter, 1998), pp. 39-56; and  “The Taos Fiesta: Invented Tradition and the Infrapolitics of Symbolic Reclamation,”  Journal of the Southwest, Vol. 39, No. 1 (Spring, 1997), pp. 33-57.
[^43]: See Mary Montano, Tradiciones Nuevomexicanas: Hispano Arts and Culture of New Mexico. (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2001), p. 74.
[^44]: See Clifford J. Rogers,  The Oxford Encyclopaedia of Medieval Warfare and Military Technology. Oxford University Press. p. 404.
[^45]: Kessell, Ibid, p. 261.
[^46]: Kessell, Remote Beyond Compare, Ibid, p. 74. 