+++
title = 'The Sites'
date = 2020-07-23T08:53:33-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'chapters'
weight = 4
+++

Tangible sites reflect both the natural and built environment, which hold stories of origins, migrations, conflicts and collaboration, all holding wisdom to be gained. The landscape of this place, however, is deeply marked by colonialism. Here, the manifest ideology of empire making — Spain, Mexico, the United States — is revealed in the colonial and even modern context, where settlement occurs hand-in-hand with the dis-peopling of an area. Tracing the lure to land, reveals the contradictions of land grants, artist colonies and the economic push and pull of migrations resulting in a contest over space and place that continue in the developments rising up in neighborhoods across the state.

In order to begin to decolonize site by site, it is important to understand where sites of trauma exist. Some of these places are known, other long since buried, literally and figuratively. Some exist because of the propensity to monumentalize events and people in certain places. While a more comprehensive assessment of colonialism and imperialism as it is manifest in places is necessary, an initial assessment of two categories of places follow, first broad themes  of place and colonialism and second, a focus on specific sites.

### Landing

In what follows is an historical arc of a broad theme that creates an opening for discussing a place based analysis of colonialism. At the one end of this arc is the idea of colonial settlement and the other a more contemporary manifestation of this, gentrification and the displacement that has occurred and continues to take place in neighborhoods across the New Mexico. Within this broad theme, there are multiple other issues that should be further analyzed, including land grants. 

#### Settlements

This place, we now call New Mexico, is one where the continuous human habitation on the land is thousands of years old. Today, there are twenty-three Native American tribes located in New Mexico, including 19 Pueblos, three Apache tribes (the Fort Sill Apache Tribe, the Jicarilla Apache Nation and the Mescalero Apache Tribe), and the Navajo Nation. While the continuing existence of these sovereign and tribal nations reflects resilience and survival, these numbers also carry the story of displacement. While early records reveal that the migrations and abandonment of certain locales began with inter-tribal warfare, including for instance, when Apache people began settling in and competing with Puebloan peoples for resources. The impact, however, wrought by Spanish conquest was dramatic, shifting the demographics of the land in ways unprecedented. While several colonial expeditions were made in the early 1500s, some even attempted settlements, the royally sanctioned expedition led by Juan Oñate in 1598 was definitive. 

Recent anti-imperial expressions have interrogated the Doctrine of Discovery, a concept of public international law expounded by the United States Supreme Court in a series of decisions, most notably Johnson v. M'Intosh in 1823. In the realm of imperialist nations, these doctrines and the core ideologies were all interconnected, but in New Mexico, the legal precedence of discovery and question began with Spanish law. One of these, the Requerimiento, a 1513 legal doctrine was intended as charter of conquest and that was in effect until 1556, though its core elements were still in use in the Spanish conquest of New Mexico.[^1] Claiming a connection to the divine, from God, to Pope and Pope to King, and King to himself as a representative, in 1598 Juan de Oñate claimed possession, not only of lands and villages, but of “mountains, rivers, river banks, waters, pastures. . . from the edge of the mountains to the stone in the river and its sands and from the stone and sands in the river to the leaf of the mountains.[^2]

As the expedition traveled north along the Rio Grande Valley, Oñate paused at each Indian settlement and obtained the inhabitants formal allegiance to their new king and a new God. How it was “obtained” is not entirely clear or at the very least revealing of the arrogance of colonialism. Possession came hand in hand with dispossession; this is not only about the impact of Spanish contact, but also of settlement. Aside from the arrogance of this claim, the impact to indigenous peoples was transformational. According to historian Ramon Gutierrez, “of the 134 Indian pueblos that [Juan de] Oñate listed between 1598  and 1601, 43 remained by 1640, a mere 20 by 1707.”[^3] These numbers reveal that from 1598 to the present, there has been the loss of 115 Puebloan communities. From the very beginning, which is to say, from that moment that all of New Mexico, including this site, is claimed and settled by a distant king, through to its settlement in the first decade of the 17th century, there are manifestations of empire upon ancestral lands.[^4]

The Oñate expedition terminus was at the Tewa village of Ohkay Owingeh, which the conqueror renamed San Juan de los Caballeros, and while it is unknown what sentiments may have actually existed for these early Tewa peoples encountering the expedition, according to Spanish records, they provided hospitality and grace. Their visitors took advantage, occupying the village’s dwellings. Recognizing a more spacious village across the river, the expedition moved and San Gabriel became the first capital of New Mexico, sited at the confluence of the Rio Chama and the Rio Grande del Norte. Within the decade, however, the capital would be moved again, south to a site that had once held Tewa village that can be dated today between A.D. 600 and 1425. Contemporary Native American Tewa communities still recognize this site as Oga Po’oge, White Shell Water Place.[^5]

Within a decade of its settlement, the provincial capital of La Villa Real de la Santa Fe counted 50 households with approximately 200 residents in 1620.[^6]  Within a decade, Fray Alonso de Benavides would report the residency of about a thousand people in Santa Fe, though by 1638, the population would dramatically decline by 20%, due to pestilence.[^7] Although Santa Fe would remain New Mexico’s only town in in the first decades of the 17th century, there were a large number of settlers that had in the 1650s began to situate themselves in haciendas in the lower Rio Grande Valley between Isleta and Senucú. The numbers of settlers remained constant until the 1680 Revolt and a census that was conducted after the event shows that approximately 2,000 settlers remained.[^8] Following the Reconquest, La Villa de Santa Cruz de la Cañada, settled by families recruited at Mexico City in 1693, became a secondary town for New Mexico. From these two primary settlements, other towns began to radiate out in the early to mid 1700s. From early 18th century to its closing, the following settlements were made: Albuquerque, 1706; Belen, 1740; Ranchos de Taos, 1750, Las Trampas, 1751; Ojo Caliente, 1754, San Miguel del Vado, 1794.  However, it is important to recognize, that even when lands were granted —another instrument of empire— settlement was made, but often contracted in reaction to non-Pueblo indigenous groups, who often considered lands being settled under the Spanish empire as their own homelands. For instance, efforts to settle parts of northern New Mexico, into what is now southern Colorado’s San Luis Valley ebbed and flowed based on the fact that it was considered the wintering grounds for Weminuche and Capote Ute people, land that was overlapping and shared (not always willingly) with Apaches, Comanches, Kiowas and the Diné (Navajo).

There are two key points to address here. First, an entire field of study has emerged from this notion — “settler colonialism” — defined by a set of key features, including “asserting false narratives and structures of settler belonging.”[^9] Where the present meets the past, where there is a great deal to be learned from this field of study and while there are certainly elements that are present in these narrative structure there are other components that complicate this field of study in a place like New Mexico. This brings us to the second point. 

Even in the colonial period, to make the assumption that these “Spanish settlements” were homogenous would be a great mistake, which is precisely what makes understanding these sites so complicated. As Linda Tuhiwai Smith has cogently observed, “Europeans resident in colonies were not culturally homogenous, so there were struggles within the colonizing community about its own identity.”[^10] This was certainly true of these settlements from the very beginning, which held Spanish born residents, but the bulk of the population was made up of castes of mixed bloods, including Indian slaves. (This is more fully flushed out below under the section labeled Narrative Framework and Identity).

#### Neighborhoods- Gentrification

Historic trauma can also be born from more contemporary manifestations of displacement and gentrification is certainly a part of this phenomena. The term was first coined by a British sociologist Ruth Glass in 1964 to describe an influx of middle-class people who displaced lower class workers in urban neighborhoods.[^11] Demographic shifts that have taken place in the past century in neighborhoods across New Mexico over the past century serve as poignant examples of this reality. These shifts have taken place and are ongoing  across New Mexico, including in large urban areas, like Albuquerque and Las Cruces and middle sized cities like Santa Fe and Taos, but increasingly the issue is impacting even smaller traditional Hispanic villages.

For places like Santa Fe and Taos, part of this history lies in how the city has developed. At a glimpse, tracing the development reveals that at different periods in these evolution of these two cities, conscious efforts were made to encourage migration from the outside. In the early 20th century, for instance, artists living in other parts of the United States were drawn to the Southwest, and by the 1920s, both Santa Fe and Taos boasted a thriving, nationally-known art colony. In Santa Fe, urban planning efforts, in conjunction with the real estate industry, proactively established practices and policies to encourage retirees to settle there. Over five decades of promoting a tourism-based economy has also shifted populations, where they live, and what they do. Coming full circle, what began one hundred years ago is again a focus for the future — enticing new cultural workers to migrate and settle in Santa Fe.

A concept that has emerged in cultural circles recently, “Creative Placemaking,” has become a way to define activities that shape the social and physical characteristics of a place. National thought leaders in the cultural arena, while generally supportive of these activities, have also pushed the field to recognize the “blind spots.” Roberto Bedoya in particular has written poignantly about what he views as a blind spot of this discourse: “a lack of awareness about the politics of belonging and dis-belonging that operate in civil society.”[^12] One of the unintended consequences of Creative Placemaking can be gentrification and displacement. New influxes of creatives can lead to population shifts that profoundly affect housing affordability, infrastructure, transit and other resources. The historical context or character of a neighborhood or community can be lost and forgotten.

It is important to recognize how patterns of displacement and the forces of gentrification shape communities. Where residents live and work in the city has been defined by dramatic shifts in population over several decades. The north and eastern parts of Santa Fe, for instance, including its downtown, have responded to a tourism- based model, incorporating upscale dining, retail and cultural institutions. The impact has been that residents who could no longer afford to live in these parts of town moved out, either to other cities or to the outskirts, effectively stratifying neighborhoods. Understanding this broader socio-historical and context, including Santa Fe’s dual history of investment and displacement is imperative to any effort for sustainable growth, and in particular to addressing issues of equity.[^13]

These social issues also have impacted rural communities over time. Today, New Mexico’s rural communities are highly susceptible to poverty, despair, homelessness, high rates of suicide, hunger and devastating dependence on drugs and alcohol, and as such, are often at the bottom of many national indicators. These present day realities are bound to something deep and profound, the cumulative impact of transgenerational experiences of displacement and loss, including of knowledge, land and objects.[^14] It is is critical to recognize that these places have been completely transformed over the past century. For decades, with the loss of ancestral lands through conquest, governmental seizure, economic necessity and corrupt legal maneuvering that impacted Native American and Indo-Hispano communities in New Mexico.[^15] The impact of these losses was a shift away from agricultural-pastoral economies, they have faced declining populations, losing large percentages of their youth to major urban centers in the region, including Albuquerque, Denver, Las Vegas, and Salt Lake City.[^16] While some families have remained, many more have left, only to return for ritual events (e.g., funerals, weddings or feast days), with untold others never journeying back at all.

### Site by Site

A more thorough analysis of the social-spatial legacy of colonialism remains to be written of New Mexico and the Southwest broadly, including the layout of villages, the presence of churches, and even houses were often built to fortify space and hold the enslaved. There are some specific places, however, that represent and reflect contested sites of the colonial history and even violence and yet, even in these spaces, they could be reimagined as sites of consciousness. A few examples follow.

#### The Santa Fe Plaza

Spanish colonial plazas throughout the Southwest functions as part and parcel of empire, including not only a focus on settlement, but also governances. As noted by historian Ralph Emerson Twitchell, The plaza was at the “center of the city. . .” and it served as the witness to countless events. In this way, Twitchell goes on to accentuate some of these events:

> Here Onate camped in 1606. Here the Pueblos burned the archives of the province when they rose in 1680. Here de Vargas halted in triumph after his reconquest. Here General Kearny planted the American flag in 1846. There is not an event of im­portance in the history of the State, from the first coming of the Spaniards to the last few years, with which the Plaza is not inti­mately connected. In this Plaza in March, 1862, was raised the flag of the Confederate States of America, and the capital occupied by troops belonging to the brigade of General H. H. Sibley.[^17]

Many other events transpired here; some were joyful and loving, others more starkly painful and some more symbolic of the imperial transitions. Recovering history requires an active process of remembering. It demands looking closely at what we see, listening intently to what we hear, distinguishing between the surface and the obscured, suppressed and deeply contested layers.  Sometimes it even requires getting close to the ground. In 2006, I was fortunate to be invited by the Santa Fe Art Institute to participate in a community performance piece, “Before You Can Walk: Crawl Santa Fe 2006,” a mass crawl around the plaza, where its participants (myself included) crawled around the plaza with narratives excerpts from Santa Fe’s past (which I scripted) pinned to their backs. It was humbling, but immensely engaging and meaningful. It was a profound act of storytelling that I will not soon forget. Recovery is not simply about recovering from what has been lost, but given the history of colonization in places like Santa Fe, recovery involves decolonization as well. Each of these stories, in effect, demand more than ever, a knowing vigilance that as one layer of imperial gloss may be pulled away, one perhaps even deeper-set still lies on the inside. 

#### The Palace of the Governors 

Although recognized today as the Palace of the Governors, it was once known as “Casas Reales de Palacio.” When Pedro de Peralta assumed the position of Governor and Captain General of New Mexico, he was instructed by Viceroy Velasco on March 30, 1609 to officially establish the Villa of Santa Fe.  Viceroy Velasco’s instructions drew upon these very meticulously detailed colonizing laws, that marked out “six vecindades [districts] for the villa and a square block for government buildings.”[^18] The Ordinances of 1573 provided the parameters for this work, which included erecting including the development of these government buildings to support “the defense and fort against those who would try to disturb or invade the town.” While it is not clear whether the Ordinances were even followed, it did evolve into a fortification.[^19] Tracing a chronological story of empire and the transitions that define the civil and military authority that resided therein, historian R.E. Twitchell notes that out of this building, “Spaniard, Pueblo Indian, then Spaniard again, then Mexican and Pueblo Indian and finally American rulers have held sway and ex­ercised authority over New Mexico.”[^20]

While the Palace of the Governors represents different things to different people. Said to be the oldest continuously occupied government building in what is now the United States, and while this may or may not be true, the reality is does represent symbolically and tangibly, for some the historical legacy of a community. It is a building however that at the very least is contested as a site. As historian Ned Blackhawk has noted, “The Palacio’s architecture spoke of dominance and power; but even more eloquent was the macabre decoration hanging in its portal: strings of dried ears of indigenous people killed by parties commissioned by the governor to punish Indian neighbors.” Tracing the arc of this colonial violence upon the land, Blackhawk notes that not only were these ears taken in battle, but he suggests that the labor of Indian slaves probably prepared these ears for what they would be used, not only as trophy but as sign of the dominance. [^21]

The New Mexico History Museum holds the awesome responsibility of serving as one of the stewards of the State’s history, including one of the most historical assets, the Palace of the Governors. The opportunity is to recognize the layers of history that are embedded in this building, including the intangible stories and to leverage this as a site of consciousness.

#### Monuments

Communities across the nation are contending with the existence of monuments that were once placed in public spaces and exist as manifestations of historic trauma. At play are not only the questions of who owns the past, but who gets to define where and how history is memorialized. This is about the power, politics and practices embedded in how community memory is structured in public art. 

There are many monuments throughout New Mexico and a fuller survey and assessment of those monuments should be done. Many of these monuments draw upon a variety of symbols: patriarchy, White supremacy, colonization and myth. In terms of mythology, a common sculpture often used to define identity in New Mexico generally is that that is composed of three stylized busts/head— an Indian, a conquistador and a cowboy. With my encouragement and guidance, in 2017, the City completed an inventory of memorials that are perceived as the denigrating of any Santa Fe population, past or present. One example may serve to open up the conversation. 

##### _Soldier’s Monument/War Memorial_

In 1865…
of the Located at the center of the Santa Fe Plaza, this memorial includes an inscription that reads: “To the heroes who have fallen in various battles with savage (a word that was chipped out of the inscription in 1974) Indians in the Territory of New Mexico.” According to Ronald L. Grimes, who was doing his field work in Santa Fe in 1973, “at the instigation of AIM (American Indian Movement) and following a letter from the governor, the [Santa Fe] City Council voted unanimously to seek removal of the monument.” The announcement became so controversial that the decision was reversed and an additional contextual plaque was added. The arguments that were largely reflected in the Santa Fe New Mexican (including from then State Historian Myra Ellen Jenkins), aside from the blatant racism, most supported keeping the monument because removal would “rewrite history.”  Grimes recognized this monument, though tangible, as embodying symbolic meaning, which some proponents for removal argued, that it was a “continuation of the past into the present.” He goes on:

> The monument is located in a symbolic place of honor, the center of the city. Placed in a museum it would mean one thing; left in the center of the plaza it meant another. Symbolic objects develop meaning in terms of what one does with them.

The arguments for and against this particular monument are strikingly parallel to those currently being posed regarding confederate and other monuments around the country.

[^1]: Williams, The American Indian in Western Legal Thought, pp. 88-93. 

[^2]: See George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, eds., Don Juan de Oñate: Colonizer of New Mexico, 1595–1628(Santa Fe: Patalacio, 1927; rpt., Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1953). Marc Simmons, The Last Conquistador: Juan de Oñate and the Settling of the Far Southwest (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991). The act of possession is also printed in Gaspar Perez de Villagra, Historia de la Nueva Mexico, fols. 114-132.

[^3]: See Ramon A. Gutierrez, When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away: Marriage, Sexuality, and Power in New Mexico, 1500-1846. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1991, p. xxviii. See also Albert H. Schroeder, “Pueblos Abandoned in Historic Times,” Handbook of North American Indians: vol. 9, pp. 236-54.

[^4]: Pedro de Peralta, New Mexico’s second colonial governor, is given viceregal instructions in 1609 to establish the villa, but even today, beneath the modern city lay the remains of a village including gardens, middens, and wall footings delineating houses dating from between A.D. 600 and 1425, a place that contemporary Tewa communities still recognize as Po’oge (White Shell Water Place). See Frances Levine, “Down Under and Ancient City: An Archaeologist’s View of Santa Fe,” in Santa Fe: History of an Ancient City, ed. David Grant Noble (Santa Fe: School of American Research, 1989, pp. 9-25. Also see White Shell Water Place: An Anthology of Native American Reflections on the 400th Anniversary of the Founding of Santa Fe 2000, ed. F. Richard Sanchez, with Stephen Wall and Ann Filemyr.

[^5]: Also see White Shell Water Place: An Anthology of Native American Reflections on the 400th Anniversary of the Founding of Santa Fe 2000, ed. F. Richard Sanchez, with Stephen Wall and Ann Filemyr.

[^6]: Communication from Viceroy to King, May 27, 1620 in George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, eds, and trans., Don Juan de Onate: Colonizer of New Mexico, 1595-1628 (Albuquerque: 1940). pp. 1139-40.

[^7]:  Peter P. Forrestal, trans., Benavides Memorial of 1630 (Washington, D.C., 1954). pp. 23-24. For 1638 decline see Petition of Fray Juan de la Prada, September 26, 1638 in Charles W. Hackett, ed. and trans., Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico, Nueva Vizcaya, and Approaches Thereto, 1773 (Washington, D.C., 1937), vol. 3. p. 108.

[^8]: Muster Roll, September 29, 1680, in Charles W. Hacket, ed., Revolt of the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico and Otermin’s Attempted Reconquest, 1680-1682 (Albuquerque, 1942), vol I, pp. 134-53. 

[^9]: See https://globalsocialtheory.org/concepts/settler-colonialism/

[^10]: Linda Tuhiwai Smith, Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples (London: Zed Books Ltd, 1999),  p. 23

[^11]: Ruth Glass, London: Aspects of Change. (London: MacGibbon & Kee, 1964).

[^12]:  Roberto Bedoya, “Placemaking and the Politics of Belonging and Dis-belonging,” Published in GIA Reader, Vol 24, No 1 (Winter 2013).

[^13]:  Understanding this broader socio-historical context, including Santa Fe’s dual history of investment and displacement is imperative to any effort for sustainable growth, and in particular to addressing issues of equity. These shifts are much more delineated in Equitable Development and Risk of Displacement, a report authored by Human Impact Partners with collaboration from Chainbreakers Collective and NM Health Equity Partnership. For the full report, see https://chainbreaker.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/HIA-report-Final.pdf

[^14]:  While there is a large amount of research on present day realities facing communities of color, the efforts to link this to historic trauma has only begun. There are several studies that have emerged toward this end, however. Taos County has the highest rates of opioid use in the State of New Mexico and Professor Sherman makes a direct correlation between this particular issue and historic trauma for Taos. See Dana K. Sherman, “Opioid Overdose in Taos, New Mexico,” The Journal of Global Health, April 1, 2017 http://www.ghjournal.org/opioid-overdose-in-taos-new-mexico-2/ See also, Goodkind,J.,Hess,J., Gorman, B., and Parker,D. (2012). “We’re Still in a Struggle”: Dine Resilience, Survival, Historical Trauma and Healing. Qualitative Health Research, 1019-1036.

[^15]:  For how these imperial policies and practices impacted indigenous peoples in the Southwest, see Edward H. Spicer, Cycles of Conquest - The Impact of Spain, Mexico, and the United States on Indians of the Southwest, 1533-1960 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1981). In violation of the “Treaty of Guadalupe de Hidalgo,” vast amount of lands were lost in the Hispanic community because of takings by federal government and through legal maneuvers. For an overview of this, see Malcolm Ebright, Land Grants and Lawsuits in Northern New Mexico (Santa Fe, N.M.: Center for Land Grants Press, 2008).

[^16]: For this history see, Sarah Deutsch, No Separate Refuge: Culture, Class, and Gender on an Anglo-Hispanic Frontier in the American Southwest, 1880-1940 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).

[^17]:  Ralph Emerson Twitchell, Leading Facts of New Mexico History (Cedar Rapids: The Torch Press, 1917) pp. 16-17.

[^18]:  See Irineo L. Chaves, “La Ynstuccion a Don Pedro de Peralta (1609),” transcribed from the Archives of the Indias at Seville, Spain by Lansing B. Bloom, with translation. New Mexico Historical Review, vol. 4, (2): 178-187.

[^19]:  For more detail about the Palace of the Governors see Cordelia Thomas Snow, “A Brief History of the Palace of the Governors and a Preliminary Report of the 1974 Excavation,” El Palacio, Vol 80, No. 3., 1974. 

[^20]: Twitchell, Leading Fact of New Mexico History, Vol. IV, p. 12.

[^21]: Ned Blackhawk, Violence Over the Land: Indians and Empires in the Early American West (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006) pp. 16-18.  





