+++
title = 'The Shadow of Symbols'
date = 2020-07-17T17:17:55-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'chapters'
weight = 3
+++
Just as language serves to define what it means to be human, symbols serve as predominant instruments through which the world comes to be represented. The word ‘symbol’ comes from the Greek σύμβολον symbolon, which means “token,” or “watchword" and is taken from the concept of bringing things together in order to contrast and compare toward determining if something is genuine. Symbols take the form of words, sounds, gestures, ideas or visual images and are used to convey other ideas and beliefs and are therefore foundational in terms of narratives and myths. 

Over the years, as I have worked particularly as a cultural anthropologist in New Mexico, observing and listening, I have noted a number of  discernible symbols that have come to be embedded in the physical landscape as well as in the consciousness of people. Toward a decolonial project, it is important to begin to identity these key symbols. The narrative of challenging symbols in New Mexico accentuates both figurative and literal representations and serves in many ways as a foundation for other sections of this overall context, including the narrative of identity and ritual celebrations. While a more comprehensive assessment of symbols may be necessary, what follows are some key symbols to consider more closely.  

### Conquistador 

The Spanish word conquistador is translated to the English and means “conqueror.” The historical figure behind the word, is associated with males who were mercenaries of the Spanish or Portuguese Monarchies charged with the conquest of the Americas. Technically, conquistadores constitute all military officials and could very well be extended to include all first European settlers of a region. The use of the word in official documents and even in popular culture was most likely limited to a very particular era—the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

In New Mexico, the use of the term emerged in the twentieth century, particularly as a moniker of the overarching frame of Nuevomexicano identity in singular Spanish terms. In a letter from writer, artist and the first curator for the Spanish Colonial Arts, Museum of New Mexico, Elizabeth Boyd, to anthropologist Charles Briggs in 1973, she noted, “As I have told you before –they (northern N.M. Spanish) are great people but most of them have lost historical background behind grandparents—when it merges into myths on los conquistadores.” The figure of the conquistador, according to anthropologist Sylvia Rodriguez, “constitutes nothing less a claim to whiteness.” So ingrained in consciousness and narrative, many New Mexicans continue to frame their sense of identity in simple terms, as the “descendants of conquistadores.”  

### Tri-Cultural Iconography

Thanks to the tourism industry, even locally, representations of New Mexico’s people are reduced to an early 20th century invention of three typologies — Anglo, Indian and Spanish — an enduring and yet deeply flawed mythology. This framework that has served as a short hand for defining who the people of New Mexico are, could not be more erroneous or offensive in that 1) it erases entire communities, including African and African American presence that, however small existed in the colonial period and exist still and contemporary community; or Asians, including Japanese interned during the mid twentieth century; 2) It created a mold of a singular American Indian identity, as if being Apache and being Ute and being Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo is all the same. In reality, each hold distinct languages, histories and world views; 3) It failed to recognize the beauty and complexity of mixture and difference, where even the slavery of Indigenous peoples was foundational in the development of who contemporary communities actually are; 4) It usually depicts male images, thus enforcing the prevalence of patriarchy or at least the absence of female figures in these depictions; and 5) Core to this mythology is the notion of harmony. The manifestations of this typologies of identity are so pervasive that they have become a part of the vocabulary, narrative and consciousness, but they are also manifest still in tangible forms throughout the landscape, including as embedded in organizational and governmental seals and logos. 

### Zia Symbol - A Case Study in Appropriation 

The most recognized of New Mexico symbols can be found on the official New Mexico State Flag, though it also appears on letterhead, license plate, tattoos and on various commercial products. Although a distinctively indigenous design, the credit is often given to Harry P. Mera, a Pennsylvania born physician and archeologist who responded to a design competition called for by the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1923. The design was taken by Mera from a 19th century pot that was on display in the Museum of Anthropology in Santa Fe, who worked with his spouse, Reba to create the flag. According the Office of the New Mexico Secretary of State, the flag’s colors, “red and yellow are the colors of Isabel of Castilla that the Spanish Conquistadors brought to the New World,” which reveal how the Meras were also part of the effort to define a romanticized idea that was prevalent at the time of the centrality of Spain in the iconography of New Mexico. In spite of the backdrop and colors, core to the design is the zia symbol itself, which Zia Pueblo has rightfully claimed for decades, in a battle against the State, was appropriated without the tribe’s permission and serves still as a contentious issue.
Municipal Seals

While a fuller analysis of municipality seals of New Mexico should be done, I have looked at the seals of the following four cities as a start: Albuquerque, Española, Santa Fe and Taos and what follows is a brief descriptions. 

- Seal of the City of Albuquerque appears fairly basic, with the centrality of the year of 1706, set in a frame emblematic of a family crest. The year is notable as it was the official Spanish founding of the Villa de Albuquerque. What stands out in this seal, however is that right above the crest and year is one of the most well known symbols of the Aztec eagle design by Richard Chavez for the flag of the United Farm Workers.   
 
- Seal of the City of Española illustrates three key symbols, including the conquistador helmet, a moving locomotive and a depiction of a clay wedding vase, upon which is emblazoned the Zia symbol. This unique version of the Tri-Cultural mythology could use further analysis, but reveals how these objects stand in for entire histories of a people, static instead of the complexity that is this unique town.

- Seal of the City of Santa Fe holds several elements and as reflected in notes found in the graphic design, revealing how the three predominant layers of colonization function and how they get framed in singular motifs. Based on my correspondence with the Santa Fe City Clerk Yolanda Y. Vigil, who notes that notes contained in the design follow: “The official seal of the city of Santa Fe incorporates much of the city's history which spans nearly four centuries. The shield depicts the castle from Oñate, who established the Spanish government in 1598; the Lion of DeVargas, who gained from the Native Americans the return of Santa Fe to Spanish government in 1693; the Mexican Eagle, which symbolizes the city's change to Mexican rule as Mexico gained its independence in 1821; and the stars and stripes, which represent the establishment of the United States system of government in 1846.” 

- Seal of Town of Taos has three key symbols. At the center of the seal is a snow capped mountain and a river running from it, revealing how critical the natural landscape is. The zia symbol is suspended above the mountain. Also incorporated is the year 1934, which corresponds to the year in which the town was incorporated.  

A more in depth analysis of seals in New Mexico and their origin, including design motivation and ethic should be done. Even this cursory analysis, reveals, however, these symbols for governance begin to function in a municipal identity and what that means to both residents and visitors alike. 

### A University Seal and its Murals

At the national level, university seals and mascots alike have been the subject of both racist stereotype and motifs for more than a century, particularly of American Indians. The resistance to these portrayals has also existed for decades. The University of New Mexico (UNM) has provided an interesting case study for all of these issues. For instance, the official seal for the university, created by University President Edward Gray in 1910 drew from tri-cultural motif and in form is similar to the Española seal. Just as the Española seal uses an object to represent the Native American, the UNM seal includes a stylistic bird, while two human male figures, which complete the tripartite representation. These two latter figures are the armed figures of the Spanish conquistador and buckskin clad the American frontiersman. The vocal resistance to this seal was led in 2016 primarily by Native American student groups (e.g. Kiva Club and Red Nation). The work of Alicia Romero to analyze the symbolism, including her emphasis of these two human figures as “heroic figure of whiteness. . .” The seal was ultimately discontinued and continues an active process to replace it.  

Resistance to public displays of colonialist iconography has existed for decades at the University of New Mexico, however. In 1938, University of New Mexico’s President, James Zimmerman commissioned Kenneth Adams to create the “Three Peoples” paintings to be exhibited on the walls of the University of New Mexico’s Zimmerman library for its opening. Adams was a Kansas born artist who had become a member of the Taos Society of Artists. The representation of Native American, Hispanos and Anglos in paintings draw from the most stereotypical motifs and serve as classic examples of how these cultures come to be raced, gendered and classed. Historian Chris Wilson has noted that the Adams paintings “constitute the foremost distillation of the visual iconography of triculturalism.” As resistance to these paintings has re-emerged, historian Samuel Sisneros has recently documented the two decades of student activism on campus that has surrounded these paintings, from 1970 to 1995. 

### La Conquistadora

While most of the symbolic icons of conquest would lean toward a gendered male figure, there is one exception. The small wooden statue of the Virgin Mary that sits in the Santa Fe Cathedral Basilica is one of the most iconic symbols in Santa Fe. For some it represents the manifestation of a sustained and profound connection to their Catholic faith as well as to their cultural heritage. As Ronald Grimes has argued, the saint emerges as a “symbolic mother” and “source of cultural identity” and “is the symbolic matrix of genealogical lines which lead to some of the most prominent families in Santa Fe and the Rio Grande valley.” While the devotion to this patron saint of Catholic Santa Fe is broader than old Santa Fe Hispanic communities, it is important to recognize what it means for multiple generations that go back hundred of years to hold this devotion. While it has been thought that the origin of this Marian image is of Spain, this claim has not been documented and may have in fact been part of the mythology to whiten the origins. However, it is known that Fray Alonso de Benavides first brought the wooden saint to Santa Fe in 1625, a community that at that time included one thousand residents. Although the saint would arrive in New Mexico in 1625, with the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 the figure would be carried with Spanish survivors to El Paso del Norte (present day El Paso, Texas) until its return in 1693.

Toward a project to recover truth and context, it is important to recognize that in this era, a systematic effort was made through both ecclesiastical and civil authorities to force a repudiation of Pueblo Indian belief systems, whereby the destruction of native icons was fundamental to the goal of conversion. Coincidently, according to research completed by historian Ramon Gutierrez, Fray Benavides himself “boasted in the 1620s that on one day alone he had seized “more than a thousand idols of wood,” which he incinerated before the assembled communities with the derisive laughter of an iconoclast.” So, the historical context in which this Marion symbol is introduced into New Mexico is framed within the violence of colonization generally, but also specifically to how these symbols functioned in that moment to displace other symbols of spiritual worship. In this instance, it is notable that the hands of the very man who conveyed this saint into New Mexico, by his own words, was complicit in the efforts to eradicate indigenous symbols of spirituality. 

They depth of this particular symbolism, however, is poignantly embedded in the name most popularized— La Conquistadora. In spite of the name known now, originally, Benavides himself referred to the saint as “Tránsito de la Virgen,” a name that Historian Fray Angelico Chavez would translate as “Assumption of the Virgin.” In that first century, the name of the saint was also referred to in the following ways: ‘Our Lady of the Assumption,’ then ‘The Immaculate Conception,” and eventually, ‘ Our Lady of the Rosary.’ Although many titles would be attributed to the saint through the centuries the most popular and resonant was that given by the governor of New Mexico seven decades after it first appears in New Mexico. Following the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 and Reconquest, Diego de Vargas renames the icon in 1693 as “Nuestra Señora de la Conquista,” or as she would come to be known more popularly, “La Conquistadora.” Even though he is credited with this new baptism, on his own deathbed, the name must not have yet been widely recognized, as Vargas calls for masses to be said in honor of “Our Lady of Remedies.”

On March 19, 1973, la Conquistadora was stolen, setting off a search that extended across multiple agencies, culminating a month later, when the figure was recovered. In 1992, because of significant protests, Archbishop Robert Sanchez added (not replaced as is often stated) a new name to La Conquistadora, “Our Lady of Peace” an effort as noted then to “heal all hurts of the past and bring all people together.”As experienced by Archbishop Sanchez twenty-five years ago, any effort to change the name of this figure is not easy. While many have expressed concern about the association of the Virgin in terms of military and the rhetoric of subjugation, including most recently by Archbishop John Wester, devotees like Fray Angélico Chávez argued that the name was given because she came with the first conquistadores, not because of any conquests, bloody or unbloody.” This logic simply does not hold. The name is set in the reality and symbol of violence and subjugation. This figure is over 400 years old and has held many titles and this last one does not fit what is core to the devotion underlying the spiritual connection people in Santa Fe and New Mexico feel toward this saint. In conversations with Archbishop Wester, I have heard him speak more about the underlying spirit of this figure. In this way, I think of the symbolism of a mother, of a woman in field of men who have named, designed who can represent what for whom. Not all people, including Indo-Hispanos of New Mexico are Catholic, but honoring the symbol of a mother is something that perhaps worth considering in the effort to heal and transcend what this figure has been used for in years past. 