+++
title = 'Telling New Mexico'
date = 2020-07-16T10:26:12-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'chapters'
weight = -1
+++

New Mexico’s story is one of astonishing complexity. It is set within a magnificent and sovereign landscape that is both ancient and modern. Its people are the heirs to unique and richly woven histories, traditions and a depth of wisdom and memories, all manifest in the physical and social landscape, tangible and intangible.
 
Like the breath left behind by those that came before, memory and wisdom are like precious seeds that have continued to retain their germinative power. Particularly imperative in the times in which we are living, awakening this capacity will require both a critical and a creative re-member-ing, passing what happened here back through heart and mind, in order to make this place and its people whole. Moving beyond the surface, this effort will invite us to listen vigilantly to what we hear and to look carefully at what we see; and to pull back the complex layers that make this story contested — people, places, moments in time and the stories that reveal the delicacy and strength of the human condition. The following reflections then, are tellings glimpses of New Mexico.

### Time Tells
Temporally, New Mexico has often been divided by archaeologists into the troublesome binary of “prehistoric” and “historic”; framed by historians into distinct periods: “Pre-contact, Spanish Colonial, Mexican, Territorial and American,” all of which fail to capture the complexities of cycles and the transitions that lead up to and follow events, both cataclysmic and ordinary.  

Time here, perhaps anywhere, cannot be captured in a straight line, but rather in the symbol of a spiral and the radiating circles of cause and effect. Sometimes words, phrases or entire stories were more revealing than numbers, like emergence or Ha’atastín, the Diné word for a period remembered as “watching out for enemies.” Yet among the countless dates, there are many that hold meaning still: contact and settlement — 1539, the moment of first contact at Halona:wa Idiwana, the Middle Place, present-day Zuñi Pueblo and 1598, date of Spanish settlers arriving in New Mexico; revolutions, including that of 1680, the most successful indigenous uprising in what is now the U.S. and one that would ensure survival and rescript Pueblo-Spanish relations, or that of 1847, defined by a coalition of Pueblo and Hispanos who would rise up against U.S. imperial occupation; belonging, 1912, the date when New Mexico shifted from a Territory to a State, following over six decades of denial of full citizenship to its residents because of race and religion. In the century since this last transition, a chain of events would transpire — the rise of the military industry, the building of a bomb, development of internment camps and continual struggles over civil rights.  
 
New Mexico is indeed delicate, changing, but there are always lessons and still there is joy, but it may not lie in the grand or epic, but instead within common cycles, celebrations and ceremonies: dust rising from dances that have persisted for ages, language and prayer that rise and fall like a song, fingers moving over beads; the births and anniversaries that have resulted from love; the dignity of work, including the annual rituals of cleaning the ditch, harvesting the crops or the daily acts of simply preparing and sharing a meal.

### Place Tells

The representations of New Mexico spatially are revealed primarily in cartography — the artistic practice of placemaking — though in the colonial context, mapping is largely about power and politics: positioning places, people and objects in space; lines on parchment that are often made at the behest of distant popes, kings and presidents. Here, the manifest ideology of empire making — Spain, Mexico, the United States — is revealed in the colonial and even modern context, where settlement occurs hand-in-hand with the dis-peopling of an area. Tracing the lure to land, reveals the contradictions of land grants, artist colonies and the economic push and pull of migrations resulting in a contest over space and place that continue in the developments rising up in neighborhoods across the state.
 
But place, the “first of all beings” according to Aristotle, also reflects where wisdom continues to sit, particularly salient where the continuous human habitation on the land is thousands of years old, perhaps beyond time. Even now, when someone looks at a ruin, but sees a home full of laughter and tears, they recognize a deep connection to geographic humanity. Ancient world-views are reflected in indigenous homelands, though many were diminished or lost by conquest, some have been retained: the four sacred mountains that define the parameters of Dinetah, the Diné homeland; and the Tewa Pueblo Indian world which embody spaces that radiates and reflects balance; surrounding bupingeh (heart of the Pueblo) are the homes and villages, just as nearby hills encircle the community and far off mountains further still, connecting land and sky. I also think of the Spanish word and concept, querencia, more than the love of land, but a generational connection to homeland for Indo-Hispanos who became land-based, peoples, who are ancestrally and contemporary connected to indigenous peoples.
 
Understanding why and how people settled where they did and how they designed, built and sustained the structures they did is critical. In this way, the human touch upon this land is visible everywhere; central plazas, churches, villages, burial grounds and agricultural lands all serve as anchors. These lands are intricately connected by trails, roads and acequias — ancient waterways that convey water from the river to fields. In all of these spaces, Native American and Indo-Hispano alike, including their points of convergence, villages have sustained multiple changes, including a mix of mud and modernism, where even mobile homes have been converted to reflect a local vernacular.

The story of place is also about loss, however. For decades, with the loss of ancestral lands through conquest, governmental seizure, economic necessity and corrupt legal maneuvering that impacted Native American and Hispanic communities in New Mexico[^9]. The impact of these losses was a shift away from agricultural-pastoral economies, and because of it, these communities have faced declining populations, losing large percentages of their youth to major urban centers in the region, including Albuquerque, Denver, Las Vegas, and Salt Lake City. While some families have remained, many more have left, only to return for ritual events (e.g., funerals, weddings or feast days), with untold others never journeying back at all. 

### People Tell

New Mexico identity is set within a national paradigm of race that persistently renders non-whites and non-blacks invisible. Thanks to the tourism industry, even locally, representations of New Mexico’s people are reduced to an early 20th century invention of three typologies — Anglo, Indian and Spanish — an enduring and yet flawed mythology that continues to conflate distinctions between sovereign tribes, erasing entire groups of people and obscuring the reality of centuries of mixture, born from acts of both love and violence, including that of indigenous slavery. Here, identity is unique and the language of blood and belonging that developed within Spanish colonial rule was a highly complex racial taxonomy and cultural hierarchy of caste that operated to control difference, with a vocabulary so ingrained that some permeations exist to this day, including words like mestizo and coyote. 

However, identity is neither static nor something that can be easily placed in a box. Here, it is more like nesting dolls, one inside the other, and beauty buried in the layers of complexity and consciousness, unknown perhaps, but still there. Some individuals and communities stand in strength and sovereignty. Others, whether they carry the complexity of their ancestry in their faces and hands or not, sustain memory in an aching consciousness. 

Yet, the most meaningful and profound reflections of New Mexico’s people emerge in both the individual and the collective and all of the relationships developed and sustained in-between. Here can be found sketches of a multitude of experiences, including of holy men and women who have long connected ground and sky, of farmers and ranchers whose relationships to land and animals nourishes community; of creatives, whose hands, hearts and minds elevate beauty and consciousness; and of leaders, formal and informal, particularly those who have had the courage to rise in their hunger for justice 

### Story Telling

In New Mexico, there are as many stories as there have been and are people, places and events, but recognizing that the story depends upon its teller is essential. Here, multiple and overlapping themes evoke origins, prophesy, innovation and convergence. Some are tales spun to excite, enchant or lure and others to inform and elevate.
History, however, is not only something that is told and represented, but also something that is lived, something that gives the world shape, that both engenders a contemplation of the images of the past that can deepen awareness of the present. The present in New Mexico, however, unfortunately retains traumas born from the past, a spiritual, emotional and psychological wounding that radiates across the generations and has contemporary implications, including internalized wounds that are only beginning to be measured. 

Today, the communities of northern New Mexico are more susceptible to poverty, despair, homelessness, high rates of suicide, hunger and a devastating dependence on drugs and alcohol and as such are often at the bottom of many national indicators. This report makes the case that these present day realities are bound to something much deeper, a trauma that has evolved from the cumulative impact of transgenerational experiences of displacement and loss.

The cataclysmic violence born from Spanish colonialism caused the original wounds, resulting in genocide, slavery and devastating losses to Native American peoples. Racial mixture also resulted from this moment of encounter and centuries of convergence of cultures, leaving an aching consciousness in many of its heirs to this day, primarily those who would come to be called Hispanos. Harms were further exacerbated by U.S. imperialism, where conquest led to a loss of land, language and cultural traditions, as well as the obfuscation and erasure of truth from the historical narratives, a reality impacting both Native American and Indo-Hispano communities. While there have been points of reconciliation, the original racial fault lines have only widened over the ages, fueling tensions and shaping present day inequities.
 
In spite of this past and the seemingly insurmountable statistics, I believe in the dignity and resilience that has long characterized the people of this landscape. Beyond the epic and grand, including the terrible and traumatic, there are also the small everyday stories, all reflecting survival and endless dignity and strength, as well as beauty and joy. While it is critical to trace the jagged edges of what New Mexico tells, it is also important to recognize that New Mexico’s collective identity is both born out of the past and nourished by it as well. There is a delicacy, but also strength in what we do to collectively change what we are. Recovery, healing and transcendence begin with a critical remembering, but also frame a creative reimagining of the present and future.

[^9]: For how these imperial policies and practices impacted indigenous peoples in the Southwest, see Edward H. Spicer, Cycles of Conquest - The Impact of Spain, Mexico, and the United States on Indians of the Southwest, 1533-1960 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1981). In violation of the “Treaty of Guadalupe de Hidalgo,” vast amount of lands were lost in the Hispanic community because of takings by federal government and through legal maneuvers. For an overview of this, see Malcolm Ebright, Land Grants and Lawsuits in Northern New Mexico (Santa Fe, N.M.: Center for Land Grants Press, 2008).  