+++
title = 'Language: Words That Wound'
date = 2020-07-16T18:56:59-04:00
draft = false
slug = ''
type = 'chapters'
weight = 1
+++
Language, including words and speech, is among the most important factor by which humans have been defined. Underlying language are the words that are used to define the world in which people live, their consciousness and means by which to understand relationships of every kind. It is also the foundation for communication and speech. What words are used to define the world forms the basis for how something is understood. It holds the potential to reveal the breadth of understanding or could narrow it. In this way, language is a powerful tool that can both create and sharpen divides as well as create openings for dialogue and understanding. 

In the colonial setting, where laws and policies governed and were recognized as the perfect instrument of empire, as some have suggested, it was made so perhaps because of what it could hide in language. For instance, when handed Antonio de Nebrija’s Spanish Gramática, the first-ever grammar of any modern European language, Queen Isabela supposedly asked the scholar, “What is it for?” “Language,” Nebrija reportedly stated, “is the perfect instrument of empire.” Nebrija’s astute observation accentuated not just the generative power of language, but perhaps its capacity, indeed the power of language to obscure, hide and deflect. In this way, legal discourse, especially Spanish legal discourse, as a product of language and empire would likewise become the ‘perfect instrument’ twisting realities with the twinned ideologies of logic and language. Legal scholar Robert A. Williams goes on to note that “law’s utility in generating legitimating arguments for the acquisition, maintenance, and defense of colonial spheres of influence was also seized on as a principle instrument of empire.” In this way, the use of language, including claiming and naming places, by agents of empire were part of this reality.

Although the power of language was an essential element of conquest and domination, it continues to be deployed in a contemporary society, particularly in a society that remains deeply defined by racist speech. As Critical Race Theory scholar Richard Delgado notes, 

In addition to the harms of immediate emotional distress and infringement of dignity, racial insults inflict psychological harm upon the victim. Racial slurs may cause long-term emotional pain because they draw upon and intensify the effects of the stigmatization, labeling, and disrespectful treatment that the victim has previously undergone. Social scientists who have studied the effects of racism have found that speech that communicates low regard for an individual because of race ‘tends to create in the victim those very traits of ‘inferiority’ that it ascribes to him.’

In the same article, Delgado notes that, “Most people today know that certain words are offensive and only calculated to wound.” Examples of these types of words or phrases are “spick” or “dirty Indian,” words that continue to reflect the supremacy of some groups or individuals over others. Another example prevalent in our era is the use of the word “illegal” to classify undocumented immigrants to the United States. In his support of the dignity of human rights and immigrants in the U.S., Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning Holocaust survivor and refugee has explicitly warned against the use of this word for people, noting, “No human being is illegal” reminding us that “once you label a people ‘illegal,’ that is exactly what the Nazis did to Jews.” In spite of dismissal of racial insults as somehow adhering to some sort of political correctness, words matter and can be deeply harmful, but Wiesel’s contention is that it could lead to more drastic and devastating consequences. Although a well known simple children’s rhyme implies that physical harm is greater than the emotional and psychological harm that comes from speech, new research in science has begun to reveal that the effect of verbal abuse is as consequential as physical abuse. 

There are also a class of words that continue to be used in places like New Mexico that are equally as harmful, even if, perhaps they are not necessarily “calculated to wound.” In New Mexico, the harms and hurt is sometimes conveyed simply in the words that we use to describe and to celebrate history. For instance, a part of the dissent of the Santa Fe Fiesta revolves around the vocabulary used — “celebration of reconquest,” which places the icon of the conquest and conqueror in a positive light, rather than more conscientiously or critically, at the very least complex. The protests around the Santa Fe Fiesta have addressed how harmful it is for Native American/Tribal peoples to hear this type of language, the language that makes explicit the loss that transpired in the conquest. Ironically, proponents of these celebrations across New Mexico, often respond with the idea that ‘what is past is past and should be left in the past,’ even as celebrations of the historical conquest are fore fronted. 

Although the harm wrought by the vocabulary underlying the celebration of victorious conquest of Spanish colonialism upon Native American communities is patently clear, the reality is that colonialism harmed everyone. In this way, this language is also harmful to Indo-Hispanos, including children who begin to define their sense of self and others based on what is communicated. In this same way, language also fails wholly to capture the complexity of history and identity. Ethnic terms like “Spanish” and “Spanish American,” intentional verbal constructions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, are part and parcel of the vocabulary that obscured and erased more than it reflected the reality of centuries of ethnic mixtures resulting from indigenous, European and African cultural convergence in New Mexico history. 

In the creation of this binary of ‘Spanish conqueror’ and ‘Native American conquered,’ lost are the multiple cycles of conquest that are actually the reality of New Mexico history. The language of empire can also be found at the heart of U.S. imperialism. The contemporary reflections of how this language continues to frame a sense of history was revealed in December of 2016, when New Mexico Education Secretary-designate Christopher Ruszkowski, championing charter schools and school choice, argued that these schools and policies were “quintessentially American.” He punctuated his point by noting: “This is a country built over the last 250 years on things like freedom, choice, competition, options, going west, Manifest Destiny — these are the fundamental principles of this country.” Though accused of being insensitive, the statement made by New Mexico’s highest ranking educational official, reflected not only poor comparative analysis, but his own lack of understanding of history and its complexities. Referring to ‘Manifest Destiny” as a “fundamental principle” of the United States, alongside freedom, was absurd and inappropriate, more than a phrase, it was, nonetheless fundamental, as a policy that defines U.S. history, one that has not fully been assessed for its impact upon places like New Mexico. Assessing language requires interrogating history, which is challenging in a climate we are living in since it positioning the critique as “un-American.”   

Interrogating the language of conquest and dominance, as well as the words that continue to reflect patriarchy, racism and homophobia is a necessary part of decolonial project. Thinking critically of the language that is used to define New Mexico, its events, places and its people is part of this imperative. Just as language can be used to divide, it is also the tool that holds the potential to preface the importance of different perspectives; it is the the means by which dialogue across the divides can happen; and it is the primary way to begin fore-fronting truth, toward transformation and its ultimate reconciliation. 