+++
headless = true
section_title = "Knowledge and Power and the Approaches to History"
title = "Knowledge and Power - Approaches to History"
type = "chapters"
weight = 2
+++
In order to revisit site by site, event by event and story by story, it is important to understand how knowledge and power work. How the past is imagined, remembered, memorialized and written is also subject to power, who holds it and who doesn’t. The inextricable relationship between knowledge and power can be found in tracing the history of colonial bureaucracies that were occupied with classifying people with censuses, surveys, ethnographies and maps[^1]. The vast extent of these bureaucracies included official repositories — archives and museums — where decisions were made about what artifacts were most valued and collected, about how materials were classified and represented, and where, for whom and how they were made accessible. Considering archives, the French philosopher, Michel Foucault, would define the colonial archive as a “monument to particular configurations of power,” and point to much of what is contained therein as “documents of exclusion,” which privileged some voices and silenced others. Political theorist, Benedict Anderson speaks to this same notion in his book, Imagined Communities, where he prefaces that maps, censuses and museums, all once defined as institutions of power, “profoundly shaped the way in which the colonial state imagined its dominion — the nature of the human beings it ruled, the geography of its domain and the legitimacy of its ancestry.” Tracing the impact of these imperial practices — which effectively extracted, obscured and erased local knowledge and communities assets — as significant markers of historic trauma, has, perhaps, never been more urgent, particularly in a decolonizing enterprise.   

Beyond the extractive enterprises, how history is written is also subject. In this way, a large part of what this particular report involves is history shaping. History is about ideology, politics and power. As poet Joy Harjo writes, “the story depends upon who is telling it.” Drawing upon the work of Robert Young, J. Abu-Lughod, Keith Jenkins, and C. Steadman, and in developing a critique of Western history, Linda Tuhiwai Smith has observed that there are at least nine key ideological beliefs that have structured this particular enterprise of the writing of history: 1) The idea that history is a totalizing discourse; 2) The idea that there is a universal history; 3) The idea that history is one large chronology; 4) The idea that history is about development; 5) The idea that history is about a self actualizing human subject; 6) The idea that the story of history can be told in one coherent narrative; 7) The idea that history as a discipline is innocent; 8) The idea that history is constructed around binary categories; 9) The idea that history is patriarchal. All of these ideas have at one level or another contributed to how history also takes place in the public arena. 

In an essay on historical consciousness, 19th century German philosopher, Friedrich Nietzsche, distinguished three approaches to history: the monumental, the antiquarian and the critical. Monumental history emphasizes great deeds of singular heroes and events. Statues, buildings and anniversary festivals all serve as examples of this type of history. Antiquarian history reflects an admiration of the past and those who want to preserve it, though because it does not connect to either the present or the future, it is not generative, does not in and of itself, create something. Examples are static displays and buildings whose integrity and interpretation are guided more by what once was, than what could be or even current or future needs for a community. Monumental and Antiquarian approaches are largely celebratory, infused with nostalgia and often reflect single and dominant perspectives; these are the approaches that have largely dominated the field of public history. 

In reaction to the celebratory, the static, and the nostalgic, a third approach has emerged — critical history — which is about analysis. Deconstructive by nature, critical history can lead some to feel disquieted and uncomfortable. Some have gone so far as to refer to this method as judgmental, though as it draws from facts, if undertaken thoughtfully and sensitively, it should not read as condemnation, but rather as deep analysis. This method actually has the potential to illuminate the erased and obscured and to include multiple perspectives, resulting in opening doors to connect past, present and future. It is an approach that usually emerges in writing, particularly in academic and scholarly monographs, though also can be made more accessible publicly (e.g. op-ed pieces, websites, blogs). The work of creatives working particularly in the visual, performing, literary and media arts, have also long taken as subject matter, the past, offering counter and imaginative interpretations. 

Set against any historical approaches, is the issue of memory, which emerges in a community as both collective and individual. Certainly, part and parcel of the methods noted above is how memory comes to shape and be shaped by how people both remember and forget. The memory of some aspects of the past are sometimes predicated on amnesia. A balanced commemoration, and yet critical approach, allows people to see the delicacy and strength of humanity from multiple vantages. Yet, in any community, there are also counter memories, which in a setting like Santa Fe and New Mexico generally, is usually not as pronounced as more dominant recollections that exists in public spaces and in the stories that are more readily told. Revealing not only how personal this memory and history are, but indeed, how deeply ingrained in our selves it can be, twentieth-century writer and cultural critic James Baldwin once noted: “History does not refer merely to the past, or even principally, to the past. On the contrary, the great force of history comes from the fact that we carry it within us—are unconsciously controlled by it in many ways, and history is literally present in all that we do.”

[^1]: See Frederick Cooper and Ann Laura Stoler, eds., Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in A Bourgeois World (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1997). 